STOP-LOSS  ORDERS  AND  PRICE  CASCADES
IN  CURRENCY  MARKETS
C. L. Osler
Abstract
In this paper, I provide evidence that currency stop-loss orders contribute to rapid, self-
reinforcing price movements, which I call "price cascades." Stop-loss orders, which instruct a
dealer to buy (sell) a certain amount of currency at the market rate once the rate has risen (fallen)
to a prespecified level, generate positive-feedback trading. Theoretical research on the 1987
stock market crash suggests that such trading can cause price discontinuities, which would
manifest themselves as price cascades.
My analysis of high-frequency exchange rates offers three main results that provide
empirical support for the hypothesis that stop-loss orders contribute to price cascades: (1)
Exchange rate trends are unusually rapid when rates reach exchange rate levels at which stop-
loss orders have been documented to cluster. (2) The response to stop-loss orders is larger than
the response to take-profit orders, which generate negative-feedback trading and are therefore
unlikely to contribute to price cascades. (3) The response to stop-loss orders lasts longer than the
response to take-profit orders. Most results are statistically significant for hours, although not for
days. Together, these results indicate that stop-loss orders propagate trends and are sometimes
triggered in waves, contributing to price cascades. Stop-loss propagated price cascades may help
explain the well-known “fat tails” of the distribution of exchange-rate returns, or equivalently the
high frequency of large exchange-rate moves. The paper also provides evidence that exchange
rates respond to non-informative order flow. (Key words: positive-feedback, stop-loss, order
flow, portfolio insurance, information, exchange rates, high-frequency, currency market
microstructure) (JEL codes: F1, G3.)
June 2002
The views expressed in the paper are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect views at the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System. The author thanks Priya Gandhi for excellent research assistance.
Any errors or omissions are the responsibility of the author.
2
STOP-LOSS  ORDERS  AND  PRICE  CASCADES
IN  CURRENCY  MARKETS
On October 7, 1998, the dollar-yen exchange rate fell 11 percent. On March 7, 2002, the
rate dropped over 3 percent. These moves, which dwarf the 0.7 percent standard deviation of
daily returns in dollar-yen since 1990, are symptomatic of a broader phenomenon: the well-
known "fat tails" of exchange rate returns. Since 1990, dollar-yen returns above four standard
deviations have occurred 85 times more frequently than predicted by the normal distribution;
under a normal distribution, daily returns above 3 percent would occur fewer than once every
100 years.1
Dramatic exchange rate moves are as puzzling to economists as they are disruptive to
market participants. According to standard exchange rate models, the main force behind them
must be news. Yet Cai et al. (2002) find that the arrival of news was of only "secondary
importance" for extraordinary yen volatility throughout 1998. Likewise, Evans (2001) finds that
"public news is rarely the predominant source of exchange rate movements over any horizon" (p.
1, italics in the original). Of greater importance, these authors suggest, is order flow.
Researchers have also turned to order flow to account for the stock market crash of 1987,
another dramatic price move that cannot be explained by news (Shiller (1989)). Theoretical
analyses have highlighted an important role for portfolio insurance and stop-loss orders, two
trading schemes in which sell orders are triggered by a price decline to a pre-specified level.
Because these schemes involve price contingent, positive feedback trading, they can contribute
to market discontinuities—that is, crashes—under imperfect information (Genotte and Leland
(1990); Easley and O'Hara (1991); Jacklin et al. (1992)).2 In the most commonly cited scenario, a
price decline from any source triggers portfolio insurance sales, causing further price declines,
which trigger additional portfolio insurance sales, etc. This type of self-reinforcing price
dynamic will be referred to here as a "price cascade." Since information about portfolio
insurance and stop-loss orders is not public, rational trading by uninformed agents could
intensify such a price cascade (Genotte and Leland (1990); Easley and O'Hara (1991)).
                                                                
1 The normal distribution used for comparison here has the same mean and standard deviation as actual returns.2 Positive-feedback trading involves sales (purchases) following price declines (rises).
3
The present paper uses this theoretical analysis of the 1987 stock market crash to help
explain the high frequency of large exchange rate moves. In what is, to the author's knowledge,
the first empirical attempt to examine the effects of price-contingent positive-feedback trading,
the paper asks, Do stop-loss orders contribute to price cascades in currency markets? The
evidence presented here suggests that the answer is Yes.
This idea is hardly new. Among market participants it is common knowledge that stop-
loss orders contribute to price cascades. With regard to the March 7, 2002 drop in dollar-yen, for
example, Deutsche Bank noted the following: "Without any news to trigger the move, Japanese
accounts aggressively sold USD/JPY, which in turn triggered successive waves of stop-loss
orders. The first wave of stop-loss selling occurred on the break of ¥130.50 and then again on the
break of ¥130. Once below ¥129.80, USD/JPY fell within seconds to ¥129.40 . . ." (DB (2002)).
Likewise, “Currency Network Daily Briefs” reported that "stops were triggered," or some
equivalent, on at least 16 of the approximately 190 trading days from December 2000 through
August 2001, or at least once every two weeks.3 Market lore suggests that participants sometimes
intentionally trigger a series of stop-loss orders, and the activity has its own name: "running the
stops." Major movements when stop-loss orders are triggered are characterized by market
participants as extremely rapid and "gappy," meaning that individual prices are skipped as the
rate moves from one price level to another.
This paper attempts to show that this phenomenon exists in currency markets, where
stop-loss orders are commonplace.4 To identify when such orders are executed, I turn to evidence
that stop-loss orders cluster in predictable ways (Osler (2002)): executed stop-loss sell orders
cluster just below round numbers; stop-loss buy orders cluster just above round numbers. 5 The
empirical analysis therefore focuses on high-frequency exchange rate behavior near round
numbers. The tests rely on minute-by-minute exchange rate quotes for dollar-mark, dollar-yen,
and dollar-U.K. pound during New York trading hours from January 1996 through April 1998.
The statistical methodology is a variant of the bootstrap (Efron (1979), (1982)).
                                                                
3 Since currency commentators are not active market traders, and their knowledge of the existence and execution of
stop-loss orders is at best second-hand, it is possible that large stop-loss orders were triggered more frequently than
this suggests.4 Note that stop-loss orders in currency  markets can include buy orders triggered by rate increases, as well as sell
orders triggered by rate decreases.5 These stop-loss orders are, to my knowledge, the first positive-feedback trades at the individual trade level
available to researchers.
4
The analysis first shows that exchange rates tend to move rapidly after reaching levels
where stop-loss orders cluster.6 This indicates that a trend can be prolonged by the execution of
some stop-loss orders triggered by that trend, consistent with the paper’s main hypothesis.
However, this result need not demonstrate that stop-loss orders are sometimes executed in
"waves," as described by Deutsche Bank. That is, it need not indicate that the execution of stop-
loss orders at one level sometimes propels rates to new levels, thereby triggering more stop-loss
orders.
To evaluate whether stop-loss orders are actually triggered in waves, the paper
undertakes two tests in which exchange rate behavior after reaching stop-loss orders is compared
with behavior after reaching other orders, called "take-profits." Take-profit orders instruct
dealers to buy (sell) a certain amount of currency if the rate falls (rises) to a particular level.
Take-profit orders differ from stop-loss orders in that they generate negative feedback trading, as
a result of which take-profit orders should not contribute to price cascades and would never be
triggered in waves. Furthermore, executed take-profit orders cluster more strongly at the exact
round numbers than do stop-loss orders, and have no tendency to cluster above or below such
numbers (Osler (2002)). The two tests both exploit the observation that if stop-loss orders are
sometimes triggered in waves, the response to stop-loss orders should be larger, and should last
longer, than the response to take-profit orders. Results support these implications.
The paper also evaluates the average response of exchange rates to take-profit orders, per
se. Results indicate that rates reverse course relatively frequently upon reaching clusters of take-
profit orders. That phenomenon is relevant to a separate question within the currency market
microstructure literature: Why do exchange rates respond to order flow? There is general
agreement that "information effects" are important, meaning that exchange rates respond to the
information content of order flow (Lyons (1995), Evans and Lyons (2001), Payne (2000);
Bjonnes and Rime (2000), Rime (2000)). There is no consensus, however, about whether
exchange rates also respond to “non-informative” order flow, that is, order flow that does not
contain news about fundamental determinants of exchange rates. If not, then the average effect of
take-profit order clusters should be zero, because the average surprise component of those
clusters should also be zero and the response to positive and negative surprises should be
symmetric. The observation that the average effect of take-profit order clusters is not zero
                                                                
6 The paper will refer interchangeably to "stop-loss order clusters" or, more accurately, " stop-loss dominated order
5
suggests that exchange rates also respond to non-informative order flow. In this, exchange rates
are apparently similar to stock and bond prices, which also seem to respond to non-informative
order flow (Shleifer (1986); Harris and Gurel (1986); Messod and Whaley (1996); Lynch and
Mendenhall (1997); Simon (1991), (1994)).
If stop-loss trading in currency markets contributes to price cascades, then it also
contributes to the high frequency of large moves relative to that predicted by the normal
distribution, a property known familiarly as "fat tails." Fat tails, in turn, contribute to "excess
kurtosis," or kurtosis higher than the value of three associated with the normal distribution.7
Existing research on excess kurtosis in currency markets has primarily focused on its statistical
origins (Westerfield (1977); Andersen et al. (2001)). In addressing instead the economic origins
of excess kurtosis, this paper joins Amihud and Mendelson (1987) and LeBaron (2001).
Though the paper interprets unusual exchange rate behavior near round numbers as the
response to clusters of stop-loss and take-profit orders, statistical analysis cannot prove that the
connection is causal. To evaluate whether some other factor might explain the unusual behavior,
the paper closely examines two alternative factors suggested in the literature: central bank
intervention and chaotic exchange rate processes. Both alternatives seem unlikely to explain the
behaviors. Finally, the paper documents patterns in the placement of large stop-loss and take-
profit orders that foster the likelihood of price cascades.
Along the way, the paper provides evidence on two related issues. First, it shows that
exchange rates seem to respond more strongly to price-contingent order flow when liquidity is
low, consistent with the results of Payne (2001). Second, the paper finds no clear asymmetry
between responses to buy and sell orders; this result contrasts with evidence for stock markets,
which suggests that share purchases affect prices differently than sales. Short sales constraints,
which are fairly severe in U.S. equity markets, have been implicated as a potential source of the
difference between the effects of share purchases and sales on stock prices. Since there are no
short sales constraints in currency markets, the apparent absence of such a difference in currency
markets supports the hypothesis that short-sales constraints underlie the observed difference in
stock markets.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                
clusters."7 "Excess kurtosis" is defined as kurtosis above the level of three, where three is the kurtosis of normally distributed
variables. The normal is a natural benchmark because most models of financial markets predict normally distributed
returns.
6
While arguing that stop-loss orders may contribute to price cascades, this paper does not
intend to suggest that these orders are the only cause, or even the primary cause, of large, rapid
exchange rate moves. On the contrary, my contention is that many such moves are unrelated to
stop-loss orders, and that when stop-loss orders are involved, other factors are often involved as
well. Other plausible contributors to large exchange rate moves include foreign exchange
intervention, news, the revelation of information by the trading process itself (Romer (1991)),
currency crises (Morris and Shin (1998)), and large liquidity-related trades.
The paper has additional implications for our understanding of exchange rates. First, the
results provide further confirmation that order flow is a strong influence, possibly the dominant
influence, on high-frequency exchange rate movements. Second, the paper highlights the
significance of an institutional feature of the market that is typically ignored in exchange rate
research, the quotation convention. Third, the results indicate that order flow need not be
monotonically related to the flow of private information into the market. Fourth, the importance
of agent heterogeneity is suggested by the fact that stop-loss orders simultaneously exist at
different requested execution rates and that stop-loss and take-profit orders can simultaneously
be open at the same requested execution rates. Finally, the results indicate that exchange rates are
path dependent at high frequencies.
The paper has five sections and a conclusion. Section I presents the data and discusses the
possible connection between stop-loss orders and large exchange rate moves. Section II provides
evidence that exchange rates trend rapidly after reaching stop-loss clusters. Section III provides
evidence that rates reverse course relatively frequently when they reach take-profit clusters, and
interprets this as indicating that rates respond to non-informative order flow. Section IV provides
evidence that the average response to stop-loss clusters is larger, and lasts longer, than the
average response to take-profit clusters. Section V evaluates possible alternative sources for the
unusual exchange rate behaviors near round numbers. Section VI offers concluding remarks.
I. BACKGROUND
This section discusses the clustering tendencies of stop-loss and take-profit orders,
describes the exchange rate data used in the empirical analysis, and reviews the fat-tailed
property of exchange rate returns.
7
A. Order Clustering
Osler (2002) documents the clustering tendencies of stop-loss and take-profit orders. The
data were taken from the complete order book of the Royal Bank of Scotland, a major foreign
exchange dealing bank, during August 1, 1999 through April 11, 2000. They include 9,655
orders, with aggregate face value over $55 billion, in three currency pairs: dollar-yen, dollar-
U.K. pound, and euro-dollar. 8 Stop-loss orders represent 43 percent of all orders by volume, and
45 percent by value. Further information about these orders is shown in Tables I and II.
Both stop-loss orders and take-profit orders tend to cluster at round numbers (Figure 1).9
Almost 10 percent of all such orders are placed at rates ending in 00 (such as ¥123.00/$ or
$1.4300/£); on average, about 3 percent of orders are placed at each of the other rates ending in 0
(such as ¥123.20/$ or $1.4370/£); about 2 percent of orders are placed at each of the rates ending
in 5.10
Nonetheless, there are striking differences between the clustering patterns of the two
order types, especially in the subset of orders that are actually executed. These can be observed
in Figure 2, which disaggregates executed orders according to type (take-profit or stop-loss) and
direction (buy or sell). Table III summarizes two critical asymmetries.11 First, executed stop-loss
buy orders cluster just above round numbers (specifically numbers ending in 00 or 50), and
executed stop-loss sell orders tend to cluster at rates just below round numbers. For example,
14.3 percent of executed stop-loss buy orders have requested execution rates ending in the range
[01,10], while only 6.9 percent of those orders have requested execution rates ending in the range
[90,99]. Second, executed take-profit orders have a stronger tendency to cluster at rates ending in
00 than executed stop-loss orders. About 9.9 percent of executed take-profit orders (weighted by
value) have requested execution rates exactly at rates ending in 00; the corresponding figure for
stop-loss orders is 3.8 percent.
                                                                
8 Osler (2002) discusses motives for placing stop-loss and take-profit orders. Harris (1998) presents a model of the
optimal use of limit orders, which can be applied with some modifications to the case of take-profit orders.9 These data are likely to be representative of the market-wide population of orders because the bank in question
deals with the full spectrum of financial and non-financial customers and is active in the interbank market.10 In currency markets, the concept of a round number is predicated on two quotation conventions. First, in the
wholesale market exchange rates for a given currency pair are universally quoted with the same currency in the
denominator: For dollar-mark and dollar-yen that currency is the dollar, for euro-dollar that currency is the euro.
Second, each exchange rate is universally quoted to a fixed number of significant digits: for dollar-mark and dollar-
pound, rates are quoted to four decimal places; for dollar-yen rates are quoted to two decimal places.11 Osler (2002) shows that these asymmetries are statistically significant.
8
The possibility that clusters of price-contingent orders could affect exchange rates,
though widely familiar to market practitioners, is not implied by traditional models of currency
markets. It is, however, consistent with the more recent microstructure approach to exchange
rates (Lyons (2001)), in which a high-frequency relationship between order flow and exchange
rates plays a central role. The constituent elements of this relationship are discussed in depth in
Section III. The analytical relationship between aggregate price-contingent order flow and the
distribution frequencies in Figure 2 is shown in the Appendix.
B. Exchange Rate Data
The empirical strategy of this paper is to examine exchange rate behavior near round
numbers, exploiting these stop-loss and take-profit clustering patterns. The tests use minute-by-
minute exchange rate quotes taken from Reuters over January 1996 through April 1998, covering
three currency pairs—dollar-mark, dollar-yen, and dollar-U.K. pound—during New York trading
hours of 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. The quote for a given minute was taken to be the one posted at or most
recently before the exact beginning of the minute.
Though transactions data would be ideal for this purpose, available transactions price
series are at most only four months long, and could not provide reliable hypothesis tests. Further,
quote levels and transactions prices are generally not widely divergent (Goodhart, Ito, and Payne
(1996)), though differences do exist (Danielsson and Payne (1999)). To insulate the results from
problems associated with these differences, I compare quote behavior at round numbers with
quote behavior at arbitrarily chosen numbers, rather than with any absolute benchmark.
C. Large Exchange Rate Moves and Stop-Loss Orders
These quote data exhibit the familiar excess kurtosis of daily exchange rate returns. For
all three currencies, kurtosis of daily log changes in mid-rates (taken at 9 am) substantially
exceeds the value of three associated with the normal distribution (Table IV). Excess kurtosis in
daily exchange rate returns, the mean of which is approximately zero, can be associated with "fat
tails," or a high frequency of large moves, or with a high frequency of tiny moves. Since the
present paper is exclusively concerned with fat tails, it is interesting to note that daily returns in
excess of three standard deviations occur between 2.5 and 4.7 times more frequently than would
be expected under the normal; changes in excess of four standard deviations occur between 24
and 63 times more frequently than would be expected under the normal.
9
Excess kurtosis has also been documented in returns to equity prices (Fama (1965)) and
bond prices (Roll (1970)). Attempts to understand the phenomenon have typically approached it
from a statistical perspective, rather than an economic perspective. The primary question
investigated to date is whether the kurtosis reflects a "mixture of normal distributions"  (e.g.,
Harris (1986); Ane and Geman (2000); Andersen et al. (2001)), a mixture of normal and jump
processes (Tucker and Pond (1988)), or a single distribution that departs from the normal (e.g.,
Mandelbrot (1963); Westerfield (1977)). Within this tradition, the strongest evidence tends to
support the mixture-of-normals hypothesis.
Rather than such statistical origins, however, this paper investigates the economic origins
of excess kurtosis. The literature provides little guidance on this issue. Ane and Geman (2000)
provide evidence that trading volume could be the mixing variable in a mixture-of-normals
distribution for equity returns. Amihud and Mendelson (1987) show that distribution of daily
NYSE returns varies with the trading process. LeBaron (2001) shows that kurtosis rises with the
time horizon agents use to evaluate the profitability of trading strategies. Building on the
common denominator of these observations, that excess kurtosis could reflect microstructural
factors, this paper suggests that stop-loss orders may be a significant source of excess kurtosis in
exchange rates.
The central idea is that stop-loss orders contribute to large, rapid, self-reinforcing price
moves, or “price cascades,” as follows: a change in the exchange rate from any source triggers
the execution of stop-loss orders, which propagates the initial exchange rate change, thereby
triggering the execution of more stop-loss orders, etc. Such a price cascade would be cut short by
stabilizing speculation if arbitrage were unlimited and if stop-loss orders were public knowledge.
However, the existence of individual stop-loss orders is generally known only to the agents
placing them and to the dealing bank monitoring them. Given this information asymmetry,
existing theory suggests that price cascades could be even more severe than suggested above:
Rational but uninformed market participants could misinterpret stop-loss trading as the activity
of informed investors and trade in parallel with the stop-loss orders, thereby intensifying price
cascades (Genotte and Leland (1990); Easely and O'Hara (1991)).
Though this analysis is based on theoretical research connecting portfolio insurance and
stop-loss orders to the possibility of stock market crashes, the cascades to which stop-loss orders
10
might contribute need be neither dramatic nor infrequent. Instead, stop-loss propagated cascades,
of varying sizes, might happen as frequently as once per week if rates are particularly volatile.
II. STOP-LOSS  ORDERS  AND  PRICE  CASCADES:  A  FIRST  TEST
If stop-loss orders contribute to price cascades, then exchange rate trends should be
especially rapid where stop-loss orders cluster. This section provides evidence that this is true.
A. Empirical Analysis
To test whether stop-loss-dominated order flow is associated with relatively rapid trends,
on average, I look closely at how exchange rates behave after crossing round numbers. Since
stop-loss buy (sell) orders cluster just above (below) round numbers, trends after crossing round
numbers should be relatively rapid, on average, if these orders occasionally contribute to price
cascades. I first find every episode in which the exchange rate reaches a round number, where
"reaching" a number is defined as coming within 0.01 percent of it. I partition these episodes into
two subsamples, one in which rates cross the round number, and another in which they reverse
course.12 Round numbers are any rates ending in "00" or "50," such as $1.4500/£ or ¥123.50/$.
The rate is defined to have crossed a number if it is above (below) the number 15 minutes
after rising (falling) to the number. For the crossing subsample I calculate the average (log)
exchange rate change during the 15 minutes after reaching the rate (longer time horizons are
considered in Section IV).13 Movements are signed so that a larger positive number means a
faster movement in the direction consistent with the hypothesis that stop-loss orders contribute to
price cascades: if the exchange rate reaches a particular number from above (below) as it moves
from period t-1 level to period t, the corresponding 15-minute move is measured as st – st+15 (st+15
– st), where st represents the log of the exchange rate. If the average signed exchange rate change
after reaching round numbers tends to exceed the corresponding average for arbitrary numbers,
in the rigorous statistical sense described below, I conclude that trends tend to be unusually rapid
after rates cross round numbers.
                                                                
12 When examining round numbers reached by downtrends (uptrends), only bid (ask) prices are used, to avoid
complications associated with changing spreads. The analysis of Easley and O'Hara (1992) implies that spreads
might decrease near round numbers as dealers anticipate a surge in liquidity trades. Hartmann (1999) provides
evidence consistent with such an effect in currency markets.13The interval of 15 minutes is chosen based on the analysis of Yao (1997), who finds that prices reach the level of
their sustained response to a trade after roughly 16 minutes.  Sixteen minutes is the product of the average 4 minutes
between passive trade times and the 5-trade time interval for the maximum price impact.
11
The bootstrap: The bootstrap methodology (Efron (1979), (1982)), which is used
throughout this paper, permits researchers to be agnostic about the correct statistical distribution
for hypothesis testing. This is advantageous when examining exchange rates, the dynamics of
which are not known to fit any parametric distribution.14 The behavior of exchange rates at
10,000 sets of 30 arbitrarily chosen exchange rates is used to approximate the behavior of
exchange rates at round numbers under the null hypothesis that round numbers are not special.
Arbitrary numbers are initially set as follows:
A = max – a range.
where max is the maximum exchange rate for the relevant time interval, range is the range of
rates over that same interval, and a is a random number chosen arbitrarily from a uniform
distribution over the unit interval. These numbers are then rounded off to the number of
significant digits appropriate to each currency (four digits to the right of the decimal for dollar-
mark and dollar-pound; two digits to the right of the decimal for dollar-yen).
The sample is divided into 58 intervals of 10 consecutive trading days. For each interval I
compare the average signed log exchange-rate change subsequent to crossing round numbers
(MVR) with the average signed change subsequent to crossing the arbitrary numbers (MVA).
Under the null hypothesis, MVR has an even chance of exceeding MVA, so each interval can be
viewed as a Bernoulli trial with probability 0.5. Results for the combined set of trials should
conform to the binomial distribution with parameters (0.5,n), where n # 58 is the number of ten-
day intervals in which both round numbers and arbitrary numbers are reached at least once.15
Under the alternative hypothesis that stop-loss orders contribute to price cascades, MVR should
tend to exceed MVA.
Results: For all three currencies, MVR > MVA, consistent with the alternative hypothesis
that rates trend rapidly, on average, after crossing round numbers (Table V). In each case, the
null hypothesis that behavior after crossing round numbers is not special can be rejected at a high
                                                                14 High-frequency exchange rate returns do not conform to the normal distribution, since they are leptokurtotic.
Formal tests of the applicability of distributions other than the normal to intraday exchange-rates have not been
published. Formal tests applied to rates at lower frequencies have been inconclusive (Westerfield (1977); Booth and
Glassman (1987); Hsieh (1988)).15 The simplest possible bootstrap test, in which this comparison is undertaken once for the entire sample period,
would be statistically unreliable. Under the central limit theorem, the second moment of the distribution used for
hypothesis testing depends on the number of times the exchange rate reaches the arbitrary levels. It proved infeasible
to ensure in a rigorous way that the exchange rate reached arbitrary numbers roughly the same number of times, on
average, that it reached round numbers, so the second moment of the critical distribution could not be appropriately
calibrated. The bootstrap test applied here relies only on first moments.
12
level of significance. For example, dollar-mark moves an average 0.061 percent during the 15
minutes after crossing a round number, but only 0.054 percent after crossing an arbitrary
number. Since the average move is higher for round numbers than for arbitrary numbers in 51 of
the 58 relevant 10-day intervals, marginal significance for this test is below 0.001 percent.
The rapid trending of exchange rates after crossing round numbers suggests that stop-loss
orders propagate trends, consistent with the hypothesis that they contribute to self-reinforcing
price movements or price cascades. However, it provides no indication whether stop-loss orders
are sometimes triggered in "waves," as described by Deutsche Bank in their analysis of the
March 7, 2002. It is possible to provide evidence of such waves, however, by contrasting the
behavior of exchange rates after reaching stop-loss orders with their behavior after reaching take-
profit orders. Section III, which follows, examines what happens after rates reach take-profit
orders. This material is interesting in its own right, since it suggests that exchange rates respond
to non-informative order flow. Section IV then contrasts exchange rate behavior at take-profit
and stop-loss orders.
III. EXCHANGE  RATES  AND  TAKE-PROFIT  ORDERS
A take-profit order instructs a dealer to buy (sell) a certain amount of currency if its value
rises to a certain level. Since take-profit orders generate price-contingent negative-feedback
trading, they should not contribute to price cascades. If stop-loss orders are sometimes triggered
in waves, then the average response to stop-loss orders should be larger, and should last longer,
than the average response to take-profit orders.
A. Average Response to Take-Profit Orders: Theory
Do exchange rates respond to take-profit orders, on average? Before undertaking an
empirical analysis of this question, it is useful to pause and examine the implications of existing
theoretical research. In the currency microstructure literature, the influence of order flow on
exchange rates is commonly modeled as deriving from "information effects," meaning that
exchange rates react to private information about exchange rate fundamentals conveyed by order
flow to dealers (Lyons (1995), Evans and Lyons (2001), Payne (2000); Bjonnes and Rime
(2000), Rime (2000)).16 If information effects are the only ones active, the average effect of take-
profit orders should be zero, according to the following logic: When exchange rates only react to
13
the information content of order flow, then when the orders are executed rates only react to the
unexpected component of such order flow (Hasbrouck (1988)). These order surprises should be
zero, on average, since active market participants are all familiar with the clustering of price-
contingent orders. Customers who place orders, currency salespersons who advise customers on
placing orders, and dealers who execute orders, can all assess the likely magnitude and direction
of price-contingent order flow conditional on the exchange rate's level and direction. Since
expectation errors average close to zero, the average effect of order clusters should also be close
to zero if positive and negative order surprises have symmetric effects on exchange rates. With
take-profit orders, there is no reason to expect any asymmetry between the effects of positive and
negative order surprises.17
Stock and bond prices appear to respond to order flow that does not convey information
about fundamentals, which for convenience will be referred to as “non-informative” order flow.
Stock prices rise when shares are listed on the S&P 500 index, an event that appears to be non-
informative (Shleifer (1986); Harris and Gurel (1986); Messod and Whaley (1996); Lynch and
Mendenhall (1997); see also Kaul et al. (2000)). Yields on specific Treasury bills rise, relative to
yields of bills with adjacent maturity, when their supply is announced to increase; there would be
no change in relative yields if yields responded solely to the arrival of information (Simon
(1991), (1994)). The rest of this section tests whether the average exchange rate response to take-
profit orders is zero. If not, one might infer that exchange rates respond to non-informative order
flow.
B. Average Response to Take-Profit Orders: Evidence
In testing whether there is any average exchange rate response to clusters of orders
dominated by take-profits, the null hypothesis will be the same as the previous null: clusters of
price-contingent orders have no effect on exchange rates, on average. The alternative hypothesis
is that exchange rate reverse course unusually frequently upon reaching clusters of take-profit
orders. Using the bootstrap methodology described above, I compare the proportion of times the
rate reverses course, or "reversal frequency," at round numbers with the corresponding
proportion at 10,000 sets of 30 arbitrary numbers. As before, a rate is defined to "reach" a level if
                                                                                                                                                                                                                
16 In the 1980s many economists accepted the more extreme proposition that non-informative order flow can only
affect prices in an inefficient market (e.g., Shleifer (1986)).17 There should be an asymmetry between the average effects of positive and negative stop-loss order surprises if
these orders are triggered in waves during some price cascades.
14
it comes within 0.01 percent of it; a rate is defined as "reversing course" if it is not beyond a
level 15 minutes after reaching it; the key statistic is the number of 10-day intervals in which the
reversal frequency at round numbers exceeds the average reversal frequency for the arbitrary
numbers.18
Results: For all three currency pairs the overall average reversal frequency for round
numbers, RVR, is higher than the overall average reversal frequency for arbitrary numbers, RVA,
consistent with the alternative hypothesis that rates reverse course frequently where take-profit
orders cluster (Table VI.A). The null hypothesis can be rejected at high levels of significance for
dollar-mark and dollar-yen, though not for dollar-pound. Using dollar-mark to illustrate once
again, the average reversal frequency is 59.3 percent at round numbers and 54.8 percent at
arbitrary numbers. The reversal frequency at round numbers exceeds the reversal frequency at
arbitrary numbers in 46 of the 58 relevant ten-day intervals, so the null hypothesis can be
rejected with marginal significance below 0.001 percent.
C. Interpretation: Inventories and Downward-Sloping Demand
If exchange rates do react to take-profit orders, on average, as these results suggest, then
one might infer that non-informative order flow affects rates. To explain evidence to the same
effect in other financial markets, research has focused on two hypotheses (Harris and Gurel
(1986)). The first asserts that the long-run demand curve for financial assets is "downward-
sloping," which could be true if agents are risk-averse and the asset has no perfect substitutes.
These two conditions seem at least plausible for currency markets: the importance of risk is well
documented in bond and stock markets (though economists have admittedly had difficulty
modeling risk premiums in forward currency markets (Lewis (1996))). And it is well-known that
the major exchange rates are poorly correlated with each other and with other liquid assets. A
downward-sloping demand curve could also exist if arbitrage is limited (Shleifer and Vishny
(1987)) and agents are heterogeneous in terms of preferences, tax bases, or views of the future.
These conditions are also plausible: the long and familiar list of limits to arbitrage includes many
that are relevant to currency markets, such as wealth and credit constraints, position limits, and
constraints on portfolio allocations. The heterogeneity of currency market participants, suggested
                                                                
18 To isolate the influence of take-profit orders, it is better to examine the frequency with which the rate reverses
course than to examine the average magnitude of the exchange rate’s subsequent movement upon reaching a round
number. This is because the movement upon crossing a round number could be exaggerated by the influence of stop-
loss orders, while movement upon reversing course would not be so influenced.
15
in part by the long list of participants (dealers, importers, exporters, investors, speculators,
hedgers), is also highlighted by research on currency forecasts (Ito (1986); Frankel and Froot
(1987); Oberlechner (2001)). The downward-sloping demand curve hypothesis has received
substantial support as an explanation for the effect of non-informative order flow on equity
prices (Shleifer (1986); Messod and Whaley (1996); Lynch and Mendenhall (1997); see also
Kaul et al. (2000)).
The second hypothesis, commonly referred to as the "price pressure" hypothesis, suggests
that market participants must be rewarded for taking on risky unwanted inventory (Harris and
Gurel (1986)).19 The potential relevance of this hypothesis is highlighted by the observation that
currency dealers are quite averse to holding inventory (Bjonnes and Rime (1999), Lyons (1995),
Yao (1997)). Nevertheless, some observers interpret existing evidence as suggesting that
inventory effects are unlikely in currency markets. Specifically, it appears that many dealers do
not shade their quotes to other dealers in response to unwanted inventory accumulation (see
Lyons (1995); (Bjonnes and Rime (2000); Yao (1997)). Direct price shading is an important
response to inventory build-up in traditional inventory models, where a monopolistic dealer
trades a financial asset (Garman (1976); Amihud and Mendelson (1980); Ho and Stoll (1981);
O'Hara and Oldfield (1986)). However, inventory imbalances could still affect rates in the
absence of direct price shading. Currency dealers are not monopolists, and can trade with each
other. Empirical evidence shows that dealing through brokers is the primary response to
inventory accumulation for many currency dealers (Yao (1997); Bjonnes and Rime (2000)).
An alternative "market-wide inventory" effect of inventories on prices can be inferred by
combining the tendency of dealers to unload unwanted inventory through brokered trades with
the fact that dealers shade prices downward (upward) when they observe a broker deal at the bid
(offer) (Goodhart, Ito, and Payne (1996)). Through this connection the market as a whole may
adjust prices to unintended inventory accumulation at a single dealer, even if individual dealers
do not directly shade their prices.20,21
                                                                
19 In the context of stock markets, the price pressure hypothesis has additional implications.20 Further evidence for the presence of inventory effects comes from bid/ask spreads. Hartmann (1998, 1999) finds
that daily spreads in dollar-yen increase with exchange rate volatility, consistent with inventory effects. Bjonnes and
Rime (2000) show that bid/ask spreads widen with order size; though they interpret this as an information effect, it
is also predicted by pure inventory models such as Ho and Stoll (1981).21 The model in Evans and Lyons (2002) has a similar property: individual dealers do not shade their prices in
response to their own inventories, but they shade prices as a group in response to observing a signal of order flow. In
the Evans/Lyons model, the signal of order flow is aggregate direct interdealer flow rather than a single trade
through a broker.
16
It would be interesting to know whether the downward-sloping demand hypothesis fits
currency data better than does the inventory hypothesis, or vice versa, although the issue is not
central to this paper. Furthermore, the order clusters examined here do not permit the two
hypotheses to be distinguished according to the standard criterion, which is the duration of the
effect of permanent order flow on prices.22
IV. STOP-LOSS  ORDERS  AND  PRICE  CASCADES:  FURTHER TESTS
So far, this paper's main result suggests that stop-loss orders propagate trends, consistent
with the hypothesis that such orders contribute to price cascades. This section provides evidence
suggesting that stop-loss orders are actually triggered in waves, using tests motivated by the
observation that, in theory, stop-loss orders can and take-profit orders cannot contribute to price
cascades. Other things equal, if stop-loss orders are triggered in waves then the average exchange
rate response to stop-loss orders should be larger, and should last longer, than the average
exchange rate response to take-profit orders. If stop-loss orders are not triggered in waves, then
the average response to stop-loss orders should be roughly equivalent to the average response to
take-profit orders.23 This contrast is apt regardless of whether exchange rates respond to non-
informative order flow.
A. Relative Size of Response
Is the average exchange rate response to stop-loss orders bigger than the average
response to take-profit orders? To examine this question, I calculate two measures: (i) the
average excess (log) price movement after rates cross round numbers (MVCR), and (ii) the
average excess (log) price movement if rates reverse course at round numbers (MVRV). Both
movements are defined to be positive under the assumption that order clusters affect exchange
rates as indicated in Sections II and III. Under the null hypothesis that stop-loss and take-profit
orders have equal effects on exchange rates, the expected value of MVCR - MVRV is zero. Under
the alternative hypothesis that stop-loss orders have a bigger effect, the expected value of MVCR -
                                                                22 Under a downward-sloping demand curve, order flow that is relatively permanent would have permanent effects
(Shleifer (1986)), and order flow that is soon reversed would have temporary effects. By contrast, under the price
pressure hypothesis all order flow would have only temporary effects (Harris and Gurel (1987); Kraus and Stoll
(1972); Hasbrouck (1988) ). This distinction is not useful here because it cannot be ascertained whether stop-loss and
take-profit order flow is soon reversed.23 One important element that may not be equal is the average size of stop-loss and take-profit order clusters. This
issue is examined explicitly later.
17
MVRV is positive. This comparison is undertaken for the 15 minute time interval used earlier and
for five longer intervals: thirty minutes, one hour, two hours, one day, and two days.
Results at the 15-minute horizon: For all three currency pairs, MVCR(15) - MVRV(15) is
positive, consistent with the alternative hypothesis that stop-loss orders contribute to price
cascades, and the null can be rejected at a significance level below 0.001 percent (Table VI.A).
For example, dollar-yen moves by 0.0130 percent more after crossing a round number than after
reversing course at a round number. Since MVCR - MVRV is positive in 46 of the 58 relevant 10-
day intervals, the null hypothesis can be rejected with marginal significance below 0.001 percent.
Results at longer horizons: For all three currency pairs MVCR - MVRV remains positive at
the thirty-minute, one-hour, and two-hour horizons (Table VI.A). For the yen, the difference
remains positive at the one-day horizon. Most of these positive differences are statistically
significant. Overall, these results suggest that any excess movement associated with the
predictable component of stop-loss orders is fast and intense, an impression consistent with the
perception of market participants.
One might question the reliability of these results, based on the lack of any control for the
absolute size of order clusters. If net price-contingent order flow is typically greater when stop-
loss orders dominate than when take-profit orders dominate, one might observe the same result
even in if stop-loss orders were not triggered in waves. To investigate this possibility, I use
equation (A1) to calculate average net order flow (as a fraction of total executed take-profit order
value) at two points: (i) after crossing round numbers, where stop-loss orders should dominate,
and (ii) exactly at round numbers, where take-profit orders should dominate. Table VII shows
that the absolute size of order clusters should not be a confounding influence on the results for
round numbers ending in 00. For example, if rates rise to a level ending in 00, net negative-
feedback trading should be equivalent to 9.3 percent of all executed take-profit order flow, on
average, far more than net positive-feedback trading of 2.3 percent just beyond rates ending in
00.
For round numbers ending in 50, however, the absolute size of order clusters could be a
confounding influence. Consequently, I repeat the analysis above including only round numbers
ending in 00. The results are qualitatively unchanged, as shown in Table VI.B. In most cases
MVCR - MVRV has the same sign as it did in the previous test, and is of the same order of
18
magnitude. The statistical significance of the tests declines modestly, but this change could
reflect the lower power of the tests.24
B. Relative Duration of Response
Does the exchange rate response to stop-loss orders last longer than the response to take-
profit orders? To examine this question, I examine how long the special behaviors identified in
Sections II and III remain statistically significant. For the crossing subsample I calculate MVR
(the average move after crossing round numbers) and MVA (the average move after crossing
arbitrary numbers) at the five horizons beyond 15 minutes. For the reversal subsample I calculate
the fraction of reversal episodes in which the exchange rate would still be considered to have
reversed course after the longer intervals of time.
Results: For every currency, the tests indicate that the effects of stop-loss order clusters
last longer than the effects of take-profit order clusters, consistent with the alternative
hypothesis. The tendency to reverse course at round numbers remains statistically significant less
than thirty minutes (Table VIII.A). By contrast, the average exchange-rate movement upon
crossing a round number remains statistically significant for at least two hours.
Once again, these conclusions are qualitatively unchanged if we examine only the
subsample of round numbers ending in 00 (Table VIII.B). Interestingly, the results vary across
subsamples in a manner consistent with differences in the underlying frequency distributions (see
Table III). Specifically, the results for trend reversals are stronger for the smaller subsample,
consistent with the fact that the dominance of take-profit orders at round numbers is more
pronounced at levels ending in 00 than at levels ending in 50. By contrast, results for trend
continuations are weaker for the smaller subsample, consistent with the fact that the dominance
of stop-loss orders just beyond round numbers is less substantial at levels ending in 00 than at
levels ending in 50.
C. Extensions
This section examines whether the behavior of exchange rates at round numbers varies
according to time of day or to the initiating direction of a trade.
Time of Day: Evidence suggests that exchange rates respond more strongly to aggregate
order flow when markets are relatively illiquid (Payne (2001)). Consequently, I run the tests of
                                                                24 The power of the tests declines because fewer round numbers are reached when round numbers are defined more
narrowly.
19
Sections II and III separately on the New York morning and afternoons.25 As shown in Table
IX.A, the special exchange rate behaviors at round numbers do tend to be more pronounced in
the New York afternoon. Most noteworthy in this context is dollar-pound; this rate's tendency to
reverse after reaching round numbers is statistically significant for the New York afternoon,
though it is not for the New York morning or for the New York trading day as a whole.
Conceivably, this morning/afternoon asymmetry could reflect higher amounts of price-
contingent order flow in the afternoons, or intraday differences in the way orders cluster.
However, the aggregate face value of open orders is likely to be smaller, not larger, in the New
York afternoon (Osler (2002)). Further, clustering patterns should be largely independent of time
because orders are typically open for many hours. Thus, the morning/afternoon asymmetry
observed here seems consistent with the hypothesis that price-contingent order-flow has a
stronger effect on rates during periods of low liquidity.
Direction of Trade: Evidence from equity markets suggests that share purchases affect
prices differently than share sales, an asymmetry that could reflect short-sales constraints (Chan
and Lakonishok (1993), (1995)). Since there are no short-sales constraints in currency markets, it
should be instructive to learn whether they exhibit a similar asymmetry. Consequently, I run the
relevant tests—those of Sections II and III—on buy and sell orders separately, where the
commodity currency is taken to be dollars in each case. The absence of any strong or consistent
asymmetry (Table IX.B) supports the relevance of short-sales constraints for the buy-sell
asymmetry in equity prices.
V. FURTHER  ANALYSIS
The analysis so far suggests that anticipated stop-loss and take-profit order clusters affect
exchange rates, and that stop-loss orders contribute to price cascades and are sometimes
triggered in waves. These results suggest at least two additional questions. First, could the
unusual behaviors of exchange rates near round numbers reflect something other than the rates'
responses to clusters of price-contingent orders? Second, can we learn more about the likelihood
of price cascades?
A. Alternative Explanations
Although it is natural to interpret the unusual exchange rate behaviors documented above
                                                                
25 The 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. period was split at 12:30 for these tests.
20
as the consequences of order clusters, the statistical analysis is actually silent about the existence
of any causal connection. Thus it is worth looking closely at the two other factors suggested by
the exchange rate literature that could conceivably generate those unusual behaviors: central
bank intervention and chaotic exchange-rate processes.
Central Bank Intervention: Central bank intervention is the only potential source
suggested by standard exchange rate models for the special behavior of exchange rates at round
numbers documented above.26 However, central bank intervention at round numbers must fit a
very specific pattern to generate the special behaviors: When rates arrive at round numbers,
central banks must initially trade "against the wind"; when rates cross round numbers, central
banks must switch and trade "with the wind." Such behavior seems unlikely to fulfill the
standard motivations for central bank intervention, such as calming disorderly markets,
smoothing exchange rate paths, or targeting exchange rates.
Empirical evidence also indicates that central bank intervention is unlikely to have
generated special behavior near round numbers during the sample period. For dollar-mark and
dollar-pound there were no reports of intervention at all during the sample period in The Wall
Street Journal and the Financial Times. Subsequent official reports confirm that the Federal
Reserve, at least, did not intervene in these currencies. The Bank of Japan was reported to
intervene on a number of occasions during the sample period, and the possibility of intervention
was occasionally discussed publicly by Japanese officials. I run the tests of Sections II and III
over the subset of 20 months in which intervention was neither reported nor discussed publicly
by government officials.27 As shown in Table X, the yen's special behaviors at round numbers
differ only slightly between the full and the restricted samples. Taken as a whole, the evidence
indicates fairly strongly that central bank intervention is not a primary source of unusual
exchange rate behaviors at round numbers.
Chaos: The exchange rate special behaviors at round numbers identified here have long
been familiar to technical analysts (Edwards and Magee (1997); Osler (2002)).28 Clyde and Osler
(1997) show that technical trading signals based on visual price patterns, like the "head-and-
shoulders," might derive their forecasting power from an underlying chaotic structure in the
                                                                
26 No other source is suggested by these models because they assume that only the log exchange rate matters for
economic outcomes, in which case the concept of a "round number" cannot be defined.27 The excluded months were 2/96; 4-6/97; 12/97; 1/98; and 3-4/98.28 Technical analysts try to predict financial prices using information limited to past prices and volumes.
21
financial price series.29 There are two strong reasons why this hypothesis is unlikely to explain
the predictive power of round numbers. First, the conditional distribution of a series generated by
a chaotic process is of necessity independent of round numbers. Second, empirical tests have
generally provided little support for the hypothesis that exchange rates are chaotic (Hsieh (1989);
Cecen and Erkal (1996)).
B. The Likelihood of Price Cascades
While useful, the results presented above do not bring us very close to the actual
phenomenon of price cascades. Even if price cascades actually did take place during the sample
period, they probably did not occur daily: market participants suggest informally that large,
noticeable cascades happen at most once per week, on average, though smaller cascades—in
which the market moves a few points or less—could occur more frequently. Since rates crossed
round numbers on the order of five times per day in the sample period, the "average exchange
rate move after crossing round numbers" is probably based primarily on episodes without price
cascades. Because of data limitations—in particular, insufficient data on large, executed stop-
loss orders—we cannot yet look directly at price cascades. It is possible, however, to investigate
whether conditions in currency markets make large price cascades more likely.
Price cascades would be most likely to occur when individual stop-loss orders are
unusually large and clustered together, and when offsetting take-profit orders are not large and
not clustered. To investigate whether currency markets foster outcomes of that sort, I look
closely at the distribution of "very large" orders, meaning those with a face value of $50 million
or more.30 For all such stop-loss (take-profit) orders in the original orders dataset, Figure 3A
(3B) plots size against the final two digits of their requested exchange rate.
A comparison of Figures 3A and 3B reveals two important points. First, the largest stop-
loss orders are far larger than the largest take-profit orders. For example, the face value of the
largest stop-loss order in the dataset, almost $450 million, is over twice the face value of the
largest take-profit order, which falls short of $200 million. Second, very large stop-loss orders
are tightly clustered near rates ending in 00, and very large take-profit orders are not so clustered.
Over 62 percent of the total face value of very large stop-loss orders had requested execution
                                                                
29 Some chaotic processes will form patterns, called "attractors," when charted in phase space (or equivalently, when
xt is plotted against xt-k). If such series are graphed against time, certain visible patterns might have predictive power.30 This definition of a very large order is based on a general perception among market participants that orders must
be at least $50 million to significantly affect rates in liquid markets.
22
rates ending in [90, 100] or [01,09], a figure that far exceeds the corresponding figure of 28
percent for very large take-profit orders.
The data thus suggest that very large stop-loss orders tend to cluster near round numbers,
where they are unlikely to be offset by take-profit order clusters of similar magnitude. Since
market participants are generally uninformed about individual stop-loss orders, currency markets
do seem to exhibit the conditions required for unanticipated stop-loss orders to contribute to
price cascades.
There may be an enhanced likelihood of stop-loss induced price cascades during currency
crises (Morris and Shin (1998)). This is suggested by the fact that average distance between the
current market rate and the execution rate for very large stop-loss orders, 4.25 percent, is almost
twice the corresponding figure for take-profit orders, 2.25 percent.31 As a result, once a currency
crisis gets under way and the exchange rate begins moving towards a new equilibrium, it is more
likely to hit pockets of large stop-loss orders that intensify the move than to hit pockets of large
take-profit orders that slow or reverse the move.
V. CONCLUSIONS
Important empirical work of recent years indicates that order flow is a critical
determinant of high-frequency exchange rate movements (Goodhart, Ito, and Payne (1996);
Evans and Lyons (1999); Rime (2000); Lyons (2001); Evans (2001)). This paper broadens our
appreciation for the potential contribution of order flow to exchange rate dynamics, by showing
that stop-loss orders may contribute to price cascades and, thereby, to excess kurtosis. The
empirical evidence is based on a close analysis of over two years of minute-by-minute exchange
rate quotes for three currencies: dollar-mark, dollar-yen, and dollar-U.K. pound.
The paper first provides evidence that exchange rates trend rapidly, on average, when
they hit clusters of stop-loss orders, consistent with the central hypothesis that stop-loss orders
are one mechanism through which price trends can become self-reinforcing. Additional tests
examine whether stop-loss orders are sometimes triggered in waves. These tests exploit the fact
that stop-loss orders might contribute to price cascades, but take-profit orders will not. Results
indicate that the response of exchange rates to stop-loss orders is larger, and lasts longer, than the
response to take-profit orders, consistent with the view that stop-loss orders are sometimes
                                                                
31 This difference is highly statistically significant, with Z-statistic 3.73.
23
triggered in waves. This holds true if the sample is split into morning and afternoon periods, and
if buy and sell orders are examined separately.
The paper also provides evidence bearing on a separate question of interest to exchange
rate researchers: Are information effects the only source of influence from order flow to
exchange rates? or, equivalently, Do exchange rates react to non-informative order flow? This
question is interesting because equity and bond prices have been shown to react to non-
informative order flow, while evidence for inventory effects—specifically price shading—is
mixed in currency markets. The question is examined by testing whether the average exchange
rate reaction to take-profit order clusters is zero. Since these clusters can be rationally anticipated
by market participants, only the surprise component should affect rates if information effects are
the only ones operative; since the surprises themselves average to zero, the average influence of
the surprise components should also be zero. Results indicate that exchange rates reverse course
relatively frequently upon reaching take-profit order clusters, suggesting that rates react to non-
informative order flow.
The paper's results suggest that high-frequency exchange rate movements are path
dependent, since the conditional distribution of an exchange rate's future levels depends in part
on the rate's current level. This has potential implications for both theoretical and empirical
work. For example, path dependence is inconsistent with the random walk assumption (Evans
(2001)) and the related assumption of a simple diffusion process (Andersen et al. (2001)). The
path dependence of exchange rates may also help explain why technical analysis has a track
record of forecasting success while standard exchange rate models do not. These are areas for
future research.
24
APPENDIX
The relationship between the frequency distribution of stop-loss and take-profit orders
and net price-contingent order flow can be articulated as follows: Let SLb(kl) represent the
amount of stop-loss buy orders triggered by the exchange rate's arrival at a level ending in the
two-digit combination kl, and let sb(kl) represent the share of all executed stop-loss buy order
value triggered at levels ending in kl; define TPs(kl) and ts(kl) similarly for take-profit sales
orders. Suppose rates rise one point between periods t-1 and t, reaching a rate ending in kl t and
triggering the execution of stop-loss buy and take-profit sell orders in period t. The effect of
these orders on exchange rates depends on net price-contingent orders, SLb(kl t) - TPs(kl t), the
expected value of which is:
VkltklsklTPklSLE sb
t
s
t
b )]()([])()([ −=− r .
Here, V is the value of the population of executed take-profit sell orders and r is the ratio of all
executed stop-loss buy order value to all executed take-profit sell order value. Substantial
differences in sample frequencies, such as those near round numbers, should correspond to
substantial amounts of net price-contingent order flow, since r is 72 percent in the original
orders dataset (Osler (2002)).
25
REFERENCES
Amihud, Yakov, and Haim Mendelson, 1980, Dealership Market:  Market-Making With
Inventory, Journal of Financial Economics 8: 31-53.
Amihud, Yakov, and Haim Mendelson, 1987, Trading Mechanisms and Stock Returns: An
Empirical Investigation, Journal of Finance 42: 533-553.
Andersen, Torben G., Tim Bollerslev, Francis X. Diebold, and Paul Labys, 2001, Exchange Rate
Returns Standardized by Realized Returns are (Nearly) Gaussian, Multinational Finance Journal
4: 159-179.
Ane, Thierry, and Helyette Geman, 2000, Order Flow, Transaction Clock, and Normality of
Asset Returns, Journal of Finance 55: 2259-2284.
Bjonnes, Geir Hoidal, and Dagfinn Rime, 2000, FX trading . . . LIVE! Dealer behavior and
trading systems in foreign exchange markets, Mimeo, Norwegian School of Management.
Boothe, Paul, and Deborah Glassman, 1987, The Statistical Distribution of Exchange Rates,
Journal of International Economics, 22: 297-319.
Cai, Jun, Yan-Leung Cheung, Raymond S.K. Lee, Michael Melvin, 2001, 'Once-in-a-Generation'
Yen Volatility in 1998: Fundamentals, Intervention, and Order Flow, forthcoming, Journal of
International Money and Finance.
Cecen, A.Avdin, and Cahit Erkal, 1996, Distinguishing Between Stochastic and Deterministic
Behavior in High Frequency Foreign Exchange Rate Returns: Can Non-linear Dynamics Help
Forecasting? International Journal of Forecasting 12: 465-73.
Chan, Louis K.C., and Josef Lakonishok, 1993, Institutional Trades and Intraday Stock Price
Behavior, Journal of Financial Economics 33: 173-199.
Chan, Louis K.C., and Josef Lakonishok, 1995, The Behavior of Stock Prices Around
Institutional Trades, Journal of Finance 50: 1147-1174.
Clyde, William C., and Carol L. Osler, 1997, Charting: Chaos Theory in Disguise? Journal of
Futures Markets 17: 489-514.
Danielsson, Jon, and Richard Payne, 1999, Real Trading Patterns and Prices in Spot Foreign
Exchange Markets, Mimeo, London School of Economics.
Deutsche Bank, Forex Daily, 7:30 GMT 7 March 2002.
Easley, David, and Maureen O'Hara, 1991, Order Form and Information in Securities Markets,
Journal of Finance 46: 905-27.
26
Easley, David, and Maureen O'Hara, 1992, Time and the Process of Security Price Adjustment,
Journal of Finance 47: 577-605.
Edwards, Robert D., and John Magee, 1997 Technical Analysis of Stock Trends, Fifth edition
(Boston: John Magee Inc.).
Efron, Bradley, 1979, Bootstrap Methods: Another Look at the Jackknife, Annals of Statistics, 7:
1-26.
Efron, Bradley, 1982, The Jackknife, the Bootstrap, and Other Resampling Plans (Philadelphia:
Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics).
Evans, Martin, FX Trading and Exchange Rate Dynamics, NBER Working Paper 8116 (February
2001) Forthcoming, Journal of Finance.
Evans, Martin, and Richard K. Lyons, 1999, Order Flow and Exchange Rate Dynamics, Journal
of Political Economy 110: 170-180.
Frankel, Jeffrey A., and Kenneth A. Froot, 1987, Using Survey Data to Test Standard
Propositions Regarding Exchange Rate Expectations, American Economic Review 77: 133-53.
Garman, Mark, Market Microstructure, 1976, Journal of Financial Economics 3: 257-75.
Genotte, Gerard, and Hayne Leland, 1990, Market Liquidity, Hedging, and Crashes, American
Economic Review 80, 999-1021.
Goodhart, Charles, Takatoshi Ito, and Richard Payne, 1996, One Day in June 1993: A Study of
the working of the Reuters 2000-2 electronic Foreign Exchange Trading System, in Jeffrey A.
Frankel, Gimapaolo Galli, and Alberto Giovannini, eds., The Microstructure of Foreign
Exchange Markets (University of Chicago Press, Chicago): 107-179.
Harris, Lawrence, 1986, Cross-Security Tests of the Mixture of Distributions Hypothesis,
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 21: 39-46.
Harris, Lawrence, 1998, Optimal dynamic order submission strategies in some stylized trading
problems, Financial Markets, Institutions and Instruments 7, 1-75.
Harris, Lawrence, and Eitan Gurel, 1986, Price and Volume Effects Associated with Changes in
the S&P 500 List: New Evidence for the Existence of Price Pressures, Journal of Finance 41:
815-29.
Hartmann, Philipp, 1999, Trading Volumes and Transaction Costs in the Foreign Exchange
Market:  Evidence from daily Dollar-Yen Spot Data, Journal of Banking and Finance 23: 801-
824.
Hartmann, Philipp, 1998, Do Reuters Spreads Reflect Currencies' Differences in Global Trading
27
Activity? Journal of International Money and Finance 17: 757-784.
Hasbrouck, Joel, 1988, Trades, Quotes, Inventories and Information Journal of Financial
Economics 22:  229-52.
Hasbrouck, Joel, 1991, Measuring the Information Content of Stock Trades, Journal of Finance
47: 179-207.
Ho, Thomas, and Hans R. Stoll, 1981, Optimal Dealer Pricing Under Transactions And Return
Uncertainty, Journal of Financial Economics 9:  47-73.
Hsieh, David, 1988, The Statistical Properties of Daily Foreign Exchange Rates:  1974-1983,
Journal of International Economics, 24:  129-45.
Hsieh, David, 1989, Testing for Nonlinear Dependence in Daily Foreign Exchange Rates,
Journal of Business 3: 339-68.
Ito, Takatoshi, 1990, Foreign Exchange Rate Expectations: Micro Survey Data, American
Economic Review 80: 434-449.
Jacklin, Charles J., Allan W. Kleidon, Paul Pfleiderer, 1992, Underestimation of Portfolio
Insurance and the Crash of October 1987, Review of Financial Studies 5: 35-63.
Kaul, Aditya, Vikas Mehrotra, and Randall Morck, 2000, Demand Curves for Stocks Do Slope
Down: New Evidence from an index Weights Adjustment, Journal of Finance 55: 893-912.
Kraus, Alan, and Hans R. Stoll, 1972, APrice Impacts of Block Trading on the New York Stock
Exchange,@ Journal of Finance 27: 569-88.
LeBaron, Blake, 2001, Empirical Regularities From Interacting Long- and Short-Memory
Investors in an Agent-Based Stock Market, IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 5:
442-455.
Lynch, Anthony W., and Richard R. Mendenhall, 1997, New Evidence on Stock Price Effects
Associated with Changes in the S&P 500 Index, Journal of Business 70: 351-83.
Lyons, Richard K., 1995, Tests of Microstructural Hypotheses in the Foreign Exchange Market,
Journal of Financial Economics 39, 321-351.
Lyons, Richard K., 2001, The Microstructure Approach to Exchange Rates, (M.I.T. Press,
Cambridge, MA).
Mandelbrot, Benoit, 1963, The Variation of Certain Speculative Prices, Journal of Business 36:
391-419.
Messod, Beneish D., and Robert E. Whaley, 1996, An Anatomy of the 'S&P Game': The Effects
of Changing the Rules, Journal of Finance 51: 1909-1930.
28
Morris, Stephen, and Shin, 1998, Unique Equilibrium in a Model of Self-Fulfilling Currency
Attacks, American Economic Review 88: 587-97.
Oberlechner, Thomas, 2001, Evaluation of Currencies in the Foreign Exchange Market:
Attitudes and Expectations of Foreign Exchange Traders, Zeitschrift fur Sozialpsychologie 3:
180-188.
O'Hara, Maureen, and George S. Oldfield, 1986, The Microeconomics of Market Making,
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 21:  361-76.
Osler, C. L., 2002, Currency Orders and Exchange Rate Dynamics: An Explanation for the
Predictive Success of Technical Analysis, forthcoming Journal of Finance.
Payne, Richard, 2000, Informed Trade in Spot Foreign Exchange Markets: An Empirical
Investigation, Mimeo, Financial Markets Group, London School of Economics.
Rime, Dagfinn, 2000, Private or Public Information in Foreign Exchange Markets?  An
Empirical Analysis, Mimeo, Norwegian School of Economics.
Romer, David, 1991, Rational Asset-Price Movements Without News, American Economic
Review 83: 1112-1130.
Shiller, Robert, 1989, Investor Behavior in the October 1987 Stock Market Crash: Survey
Evidence, in Market Volatility (M.I.T. Press, Cambridge Massachusetts): 379-403.
Shleifer, Andrei, 1986, Do Demand Curves for Stocks Slope Down? Journal of Finance 41: 579-
590.
Shleifer, Andrei, Robert Vishny, 1997, Limits to Arbitrage, Journal of Finance 52: 35-55.
Simon, David P., 1991, Segmentation in the Treasury Bill Market: Evidence from Cash
Management Bills, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 26: 97-108.
Simon, David P., 1994, Further Evidence on Segmentation in the Treasury Bill Market, Journal
of Banking and Finance 18: 139-151.
Tucker, Alan L., and Lallon Pond, 1988, The Probability Distribution of Foreign Exchange Price
Changes: Tests of Candidate Processes, Review of Economics and Statistics 70: 638-647.
Westerfield, Janice Moulton, 1977, An Examination of Foreign Exchange Risk Under Fixed and
floating Rate Regimes, Journal of International Economics 7:  181-200.
Yao, Jian, 1997, Market Making in the Interbank Foreign Exchange Market, New York
University, Salomon Center, Working Paper S/98/03.
29
Table I: Descriptive Information on Stop-Loss and Take-Profit Orders
The table describes all stop-loss and take-profit orders for three currency pairs—dollar-yen, dollar-
U.K. pound, and euro-dollar— placed at a major foreign exchange dealing bank over August 1, 1999
through April 11, 2000. There are 9,655 orders with aggregate value in excess of $55 billion. The
symbol * (**) indicates significance at the five (one) percent level.
All Orders Stop-Loss Take-Profit |Z-Stat.|,
SL vs TP
Number Orders      9,655     3,935     5,720
Share of Orders 100.0 42.6 57.4
Size ($ Mill.):         Mean
                                Median
      5.78
      3.00
   6.35
   3.24
     5.39
     2.12
     3.63**
   10.81**
Dist. to Mkt. (%): Mean
                                Median
      0.92
      0.53
   0.91
   0.43
     0.93
    0.68
0.52
    8.08**
Days Open:            Mean
                                Median
    3.79
    0.56
   3.42
   0.46
  4.05
  0.59
    2.39**
    9.72**
Share Executed   27.9 28.3 29.9   1.71*
Share Placed by Customers   72.8 64.1 78.8 15.9**
30
Table II: Further Descriptive Information of Stop-Loss and Take-Profit Orders
The table lists the sources of all stop-loss and take-profit orders for three currency pairs—dollar-
yen, dollar-U.K. pound, and euro-dollar— placed at a major foreign exchange dealing bank over
August 1, 1999 through April 11, 2000. There are 9,655 orders with aggregate value in excess of
$55 billion. If orders amounts were not originally measured in dollars, the dollar value represents
the original order amount adjusted by the requested execution rate. "Other" customer orders are
orders from all sources placed in Tokyo and orders intended to hedge customer options positions.
"Internal" orders are those placed by agents within the bank.
Number
of
Orders
Percent
of
Orders
Dollar Value of
Orders
($ Billions)
Percent
of
Order Value
All Orders 9,655 100.0 55.9 100.0
Customer Orders 7,027   72.8 335.8   64.0
                     Fin. Inst.                5,357                     55.5                      27.6                      49.4
                     Non-Fin. Inst.                   770                       8.0                        4.9                        8.8
                     Other                   900                       9.3                        3.3                        5.9
Internal 2,628  27.2 20.1 36.0
31
Table III: Requested Execution Rates Near Round Numbers
The table summarizes asymmetries in the distribution of requested execution rates for stop-loss and take-profit
orders near exchange rates with far-right digits 00 or 50. For each entry, I take the percent of executed orders of each
order type with requested execution rates ending in the indicated set of two-digit numbers (weighted by value), and
sum them. The underlying data comprise 9,655 stop-loss and take-profit orders in three highly-active currency
pairs—dollar-yen, dollar-U.K. pound, and euro-dollar—processed by a major foreign exchange dealing bank during
August 1, 1999 through April 11, 2000.
Stop-loss Orders Take-profit Orders
Buy Sell Buy Sell
At 00 2.8 4.8 8.6 11.3
Around 00
   90-99   6.9 10.0 10.9  8.9
   01-10 14.3  5.0 12.4  8.6
   Difference   7.4 -4.9   1.4 -0.2
   Marg. Sig. 0.028 0.063 0.330 0.505
At 50 3.8 4.5 3.9 4.0
Around 50
   40-49    6.3  16.3 7.5 7.4
   51-60  18.1    8.0 8.4 6.4
   Difference 11.7  -8.3 0.9 -1.0
   Marg. Sig. 0.002 0.005 0.387 0.403
32
Table IV: The High Frequency of Large Exchange Rate Moves
The table illustrates the high frequency of large exchange rate moves using daily exchange rate
quotes taken at 9 a.m. New York time over January 2, 1996 through April 30, 1998. "Excess
Kurtosis" refers to kurtosis above the level of 3 associated with the normal distribution (with a
standard small-sample adjustment). The "Frequency Ratio" shows the ratio of (1) the frequency
with which absolute log exchange rate moves exceed a given cutoff in the data and (2) the
frequency with which log exchange rate moves would exceed a given cutoff under the normal
distribution. A number above unity implies that changes of a given magnitude are observed more
frequently in the data than predicted by the normal distribution.
DEM JPY GBP
Excess Kurtosis 1.52 3.36 1.71
Frequency Ratio
     Changes Above 2 Std Dev.   0.89   1.02   1.17
     Changes Above 3 Std Dev.   2.50   4.71   4.67
     Changes Above 4 Std Dev. 39.66 24.25 63.10
33
Table V: Exchange Rate Behavior At Round Numbers
The table reports tests of the null hypothesis that exchange rates do not exhibit special behaviors at round numbers
against two alternative hypotheses:   (1): exchange rate trends are more frequently reflected at round numbers than at
arbitrary numbers;  (2):  exchange rate trends are generally stronger after rates cross round numbers. The underlying
data are minute-by-minute exchange rate quotes during 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. New York time over January 2, 1996
through April 30, 1998. Round numbers are rates ending in 00, such as $1.6500/£,  ¥123.00/$, or 00.9800/$, or rates
ending in 50.
For 58 non-overlapping 10-trading-day intervals, the exchange rate's average behavior at round numbers
was compared with its average behavior at 10,000 sets of arbitrary numbers, 30 numbers per set. For alternative
hypothesis (1), I calculated the frequency with which the rate reversed course after hitting a given level (R RN for
round numbers, RAN for arbitrary numbers). Hitting a level was defined as coming within 0.01 percent of it;
reversing was defined as being above (below) a support level 15 minutes later. For alternative hypothesis (2), I
calculated the average exchange-rate move after hitting a level, conditional on a failure to bounce (MV RN for round
numbers, MVAN for arbitrary numbers). These moves have a positive sign if the previous trend was continued, and
are measured in points. Each interval can be viewed as an independent Bernoulli trial, with probability one half. The
final test involved counting the number of intervals in which the exchange rate's behavior at round numbers exceeds
its average behavior at arbitrary levels. This number should have a binomial distribution with n = total number of
relevant intervals and p = ½.
A.  Strong Trends After Crossing Round Numbers
DEM JPY GBP
Overall Average, MVR
Overall Average, MVA
6.08
5.37
6.89
5.98
4.92
4.59
Intervals MVRN>MVA
Total Intervals
Marg Sig.
51
58
(0.000)
33
57
(0.000)
36
58
(0.024)
B.  Frequent Trend Reversals at Round Numbers
DEM JPY GBP
Overall Average, RR
Overall Average, RA
59.3
54.8
60.1
57.3
58.1
56.6
Intervals RR>RA
Total Intervals
Marg Sig.
46
58
(0.000)
40
57
(0.002)
33
58
(0.179)
34
Table VI: Are the Effects of Stop-Loss Orders Larger Than the Effects of Take-Profit
Orders?
The table reports tests of the null hypothesis that exchange rate movements after crossing round numbers
are equal in size, on average, to exchange rate movements after failing to cross round numbers. Rows associated
with "Excess Movement" report the average excess, relative to arbitrary numbers, of the difference between (1) the
(absolute) exchange rate movement conditional on crossing a round number (where crossing is defined as ...), and
(2) the (absolute) average exchange rate movement conditional on failing to cross round numbers. Figures are in
hundredths of a percent, and are of the same order of magnitude as "points." Bold figures highlight all horizons at
which the results are positive, consistent with the hypothesis that stop-loss orders can propagate price cascades.
Rows associated with "Statistical Significance" report the marginal significance of the same difference, calculated
using the bootstrap algorithm described below. Bold figures highlight all horizons at which the results are
statistically significant at the 10 percent level. The underlying data are minute-by-minute exchange rate quotes taken
over 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. New York time during January 2, 1996 through April 30, 1998. Round numbers are rates
ending in 00, such as DM1.5700/$,  ¥123.00/$, or $1.6500/£, or rates ending in 50.
For each 10-trading-day interval, the exchange rate's average behavior at round numbers was compared
with its average behavior at 10,000 sets of arbitrary numbers, with 30 numbers in each set. Hitting a level was
defined as coming within 0.01 percent of it; reversing was defined as remaining above (below) a support level after
15 minutes. Each interval can be viewed as an independent Bernoulli trial, with probability one half. The final test
involved counting the number of intervals in which the exchange rate's behavior at round numbers exceeds its
average behavior at arbitrary levels. This number should have a binomial distribution with n = total relevant
intervals and p = ½.
VI.A.  All round numbers (levels ending in 00 and 50)
DEM JPY GBP
Excess Movement 15 Minutes 1.12 1.30 0.77
30 Minutes 0.89 1.34 0.80
1 Hour 0.57 1.26 0.27
2 Hours 0.85 2.35 0.35
1 Day -5.23 1.27 -2.60
2 Days -2.53 -2.13 -2.63
Statistical Significance 15 Minutes 0.000 0.000 0.000
30 Minutes 0.000 0.001 0.012
1 Hour 0.024 0.017 0.179
2 Hours 0.119 0.017 0.347
1 Day 0.119 0.500 0.074
2 Days 0.552 0.500 0.179
35
VI.B Levels ending in 00, only
DEM JPY GBP
Excess Movement 15 Minutes 1.92 1.27 0.63
30 Minutes 1.06 1.06 0.88
1 Hour 0.98 0.16 0.40
2 Hours 1.08 1.61 0.67
1 Day -1.12 -2.40 -4.67
2 Days -1.64 -9.74 -1.87
Statistical Significance 15 Minutes 0.000 0.004 0.043
30 Minutes 0.024 0.056 0.179
1 Hour 0.179 0.396 0.256
2 Hours 0.256 0.500 0.179
1 Day 0.448 0.396 0.119
2 Days 0.448 0.500 0.256
36
Table VII:  Net Order Flow Near Round Numbers
The table shows net price-contingent positive-feedback trading as a percent of all executed take-profit order
value. "Just below (above) round numbers" means at all rates ten points or fewer below (above) the number. The
underlying data comprise 9,655 stop-loss and take-profit orders in three highly-active currency pairs—dollar-yen,
dollar-U.K. pound, and euro-dollar—processed by a major foreign exchange dealing bank during August 1, 1999
through April 11, 2000.
Order flow triggered Rates ending in 00 Rates ending in 50
At round numbers, rising rates
       (SLB-TPS)
-9.32 -0.64
At round numbers, falling rates
       (SLS-TPB)
-5.13 -1.22
Just below round numbers, falling rates
       (SLS-TPB)
-0.12 1.84
Just above round numbers, rising rates
        (SLB-TPS)
2.27 4.63
37
Table VIII: Do the Effects of Stop-Loss Orders Last Longer Than the Effects of Take-
Profit Orders?
The table reports tests of the null hypothesis that exchange rates do not behave differently at round numbers
against two alternative hypotheses. For the rows under "Trend Reversal," the alternative hypothesis is that, if
exchange rates reverse course after hitting a round number, they are relatively unlikely to return to average behavior.
For the rows under "Trend Continuation," the alternative hypothesis is that exchange rates will trend relatively
rapidly if they fail to reverse course after hitting round numbers. The underlying data are minute-by-minute
exchange rate quotes taken over 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. New York time during January 2, 1996 through April 30, 1998.
Round numbers are rates ending in 00, such as DM1.5700/$,  ¥123.00/$, or $1.6500/£, or rates ending in 50.
For each 10-trading-day interval, the exchange rate's average behavior at round numbers was compared
with its average behavior at 10,000 sets of arbitrary numbers, with 30 numbers in each set. Hitting a level was
defined as coming within 0.01 percent of it; reversing was defined as remaining above (below) a support level after
15 minutes. Each interval can be viewed as an independent Bernoulli trial, with probability one half. The final test
involved counting the number of intervals in which the exchange rate's behavior at round numbers exceeds its
average behavior at arbitrary levels. This number should have a binomial distribution with n = total relevant
intervals and p = ½.
The figures represent the marginal significance of the results under the null hypothesis. Figures highlighted
in bold represent horizons at which the results are statistically significant at the 10 percent level or better.
VIII.A.  All round numbers (levels ending in 00 and 50)
DEM JPY GBP
Trend Reversal 30 Minutes 0.119 0.214 0.256
1 Hour 0.043 0.500 0.347
2 Hours 0.043 0.396 0.043
1 Day 0.552 0.500 0.179
2 Days 0.552 0.092 0.347
Trend Continuation 30 Minutes 0.001 0.001 0.006
1 Hour 0.001 0.031 0.074
2 Hours 0.074 0.145 0.448
1 Day 0.074 0.145 0.179
2 Days 0.552 0.298 0.074
VIII.B Levels ending in 00, only
DEM JPY GBP
Trend Reversal 30 Minutes 0.004 0.004 0.256
1 Hour 0.448 0.500 0.119
2 Hours 0.552 0.500 0.119
1 Day 0.552 0.396 0.347
2 Days 0.552 0.298 0.347
Trend Continuation 30 Minutes 0.074 0.017 0.024
1 Hour 0.043 0.145 0.024
2 Hours 0.256 0.214 0.179
1 Day 0.552 0.396 0.179
2 Days 0.256 0.298 0.179
38
Table IX:  Robustness Tests
The table examines whether the special exchange rate behaviors at round numbers are more pronounced when markets are relatively liquid (the New York
morning) or when they are less liquid (New York afternoon). For each test, the null hypothesis that exchange rates do not behave differently at round numbers.
There are two alternative hypotheses: (1): exchange rate trends are more frequently reflected at round numbers than at arbitrary numbers. (2):  exchange rate
trends are stronger after the rate crosses round numbers. (3) trending after round numbers are crossed is stronger than trending after rates reverse at round
numbers. The underlying data are minute-by-minute exchange rate quotes during 9 am to 4 p.m. New York time over January 2, 1996 through April 30, 1998,
excluding months in which intervention in JPY was either reported in the press or discussed in the press by Japanese financial authorities. The excluded months
were February, 1996; April through June, 1997; December, 1997;  January, 1998; and March and April, 1998. Ro und numbers are rates ending in 00, such as
¥123.00/$, or rates ending in 50.
For each 10-trading-day interval, the exchange rate's average behavior at round numbers was compared with its average behavior at 1,000 sets of
arbitrary numbers, with 30 numbers in each set. For alternative hypothesis (1), I calculated the frequency with which the rate reversed course after hitting a given
level (RRN for round numbers, R AN for arbitrary numbers). Hitting a level was defined as coming within 0.01 percent of it; reversing was defined as remaining
above (below) a level after 15 minutes. For alternative hypothesis (2), I calculated the average exchange-rate move after hitting a level, conditional on a failure to
bounce ( MVR for round numbers, MVA for arbitrary numbers). These moves have a positive sign if the previous trend was continued, and are measured in points.
Each interval can be viewed as an independent Bernoulli trial, with probability one half. The final test involved counting the number of intervals in which the
exchange rate's behavior at round numbers exceeds its average behavior at arbitrary levels. This number should have a binomial distribution with n = total
relevant intervals and p = ½..
IX.A.  Time of Day
Currency DEM JPY GBP
Hypothesis: New York time am pm am pm am pm
1 Strong Trends After
Crossing Round
Numbers
MVR - MVA
Marginal Significance
0.64
(0.000)
0.79
(0.000)
0.70
(0.000)
1.29
(0.017)
0.22
(0.347)
0.62
(0.003)
2 Trend Reversals at
Round Numbers
RVR - RVA
Marginal Significance
3.03
(0.003)
7.15
(0.000)
1.26
(0.145)
6.93
(0.000)
0.17
(0.347)
4.91
(0.000)
3 Trends After Crossing >
Trends After Reversing
Excess Movement
Marginal Significance
0.84
(0.000)
1.48
(0.000)
1.06
(0.000)
1.56
(0.001)
0.55
(0.012)
1.42
(0.000)
4 Trends After Crossing
Last Longer Than
Reversals
Trends Sig. Through
Reversal Sig.Through
15 min.
30 min.
30 min.
60 min.
0 min.
30 min.
15 min.
30 min.
0 min.
0 min.
15 min.
120 min.
39
IX.B:  Direction of Trade
Currency DEM JPY GBP
Hypothesis: New York time Sell$ Buy$ Sell$ Buy$ Sell$ Buy$
1 Strong Trends After
Crossing Round
Numbers
MVR - MVA
Marginal Significance
0.80
(0.000)
1.34
(0.000)
1.19
(0.000)
0.56
(0.000)
0.22
(0.074)
0.43
(0.012)
2 Trend Reversals at
Round Numbers
RVR - RVA
Marginal Significance
4.28
(0.012)
4.65
(0.012)
3.47
(0.092)
2.10
(0.145)
1.32
(0.552)
1.74
(0.119)
40
Table X:  Results for JPY excluding months in which central bank intervention was
reported or discussed in the business press.
The table reports tests of the null hypothesis that exchange rates do not behave differently at round numbers against
two alternative hypotheses: Alternative hypothesis (1): exchange rate trends are more frequently reflected at round
numbers than at arbitrary numbers. Alternative hypothesis (2):  exchange rate trends are stronger after the rate
crosses round numbers. The underlying data are minute-by-minute exchange rate quotes during 9 am to 4 p.m. New
York time over January 2, 1996 through April 30, 1998, excluding months in which intervention in JPY was either
reported in the press or discussed in the press by Japanese financial authorities. The excluded months were February,
1996; April through June, 1997; December, 1997;  January, 1998; and March and April, 1998. Ro und numbers are
rates ending in 00, such as ¥123.00/$, or rates ending in 50.
For each 10-trading-day interval, the exchange rate's average behavior at round numbers was compared
with its average behavior at 1,000 sets of arbitrary numbers, with 30 numbers in each set. For alternative hypothesis
(1), I calculated the frequency with which the rate reversed course after hitting a given level (R RN for round
numbers, RAN for arbitrary numbers). Hitting a level was defined as coming within 0.01 percent of it;  reversing was
defined as remaining above (below) a support level after 15 minutes. For alternative hypothesis (2), I calculated the
average exchange-rate move after hitting a level, conditional on a failure to bounce (MV RN for round numbers,
MVAN for arbitrary numbers). These moves have a positive sign if the previous trend was continued, and are
measured in points. Each interval can be viewed as an independent Bernoulli trial, with probability one half. The
final test involved counting the number of intervals in which the exchange rate's behavior at round numbers exceeds
its average behavior at arbitrary levels. This number should have a binomial distribution with n = total relevant
intervals and p = ½.
Hypothesis: JPY
1 Strong Trends After Crossing
Round Numbers
MVR - MVA
Marginal Significance
1.05
(0.000)
2 Trend Reversals at Round
Numbers
RV – RVA
Marginal Significance
3.7
(0.001)
3 Trends After Crossing >
Trends After Reversing
Excess Movement
Marginal Significance
1.23
0.000
4 Trends After Crossing Last
Longer Than Reversals
Trends Significant Through
Reversal Significant Through
60 min.
30 min.
41
Figure 1. Requested Execution Rates for Stop-loss and Take-Profit Orders: Distribution of
Final Two Digits
The figure shows the distribution of requested execution rates for all placed stop-loss and take-profit orders for three currency pairs—dollar-yen, dollar-pound,
and euro-dollar—processed by a major dealing bank between August 1, 1999 through April 11, 2000. Orders are aggregated across the three currencies.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
00 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Final Two Digits
Percent
42
Figure 2. Requested Execution Rates:  Distribution of Final Two Digits
The figures show the distribution of requested execution rates for all executed stop-loss and take-profit orders for three currency pairs--dollar-yen, dollar-pound,
and euro-dollar—processed by a major dealing bank between August 1, 1999 through April 11, 2000. Orders are weighted by value and aggregated across three
currencies, but disaggregated according to type of order.
(A) Stop-loss Buy
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
00 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Final Two Digits
(B) Stop-loss Sell
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
00 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Final Two Digits
(C) Take-profit Buy
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
00 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Final Two Digits
(D) Take-profit Sell
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
00 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Final Two Digits

43
Figure 3A: Very Large Stop-Loss Orders
The figure plots the size and final two significant digits for every stop-loss order with face value of $50 million or more. The data
include stop-loss orders for three currency pairs--dollar-yen, dollar-pound, and euro-dollar—processed by a major dealing bank
between August 1, 1999 through April 11, 2000
$0
$50,000,000
$100,000,000
$150,000,000
$200,000,000
$250,000,000
$300,000,000
$350,000,000
$400,000,000
$450,000,000
$500,000,000
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 100
Final two digits
44
Figure 3B: Very Large Take-Profit Orders
The figure plots the size and final two significant digits for every take-profit order with face value of $50 million or more. The data
include stop-loss orders for three currency pairs--dollar-yen, dollar-pound, and euro-dollar—processed by a major dealing bank
between August 1, 1999 through April 11, 2000.
$0
$50,000,000
$100,000,000
$150,000,000
$200,000,000
$250,000,000
$300,000,000
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 100
Final two digits