Perpetual Futures and Basis Risk:
Evidence from Cryptocurrency
Preliminary
Will Gornall∗ Martin Rinaldi∗ Yizhou Xiao†
May 19, 2025
Abstract
We study the design of futures contracts using the cryptocurrency market as a natu-
ral laboratory. In these markets, constrained arbitrage capital and volatile speculative
demand frequently drive futures prices away from their underlying assets. Perpet-
ual futures emerged in response, using small, frequent funding payments to keep prices
aligned. We document that these contracts now dominate trading volume, enhance liq-
uidity, and reduce extreme price dislocations. A tractable model of capital-constrained
arbitrage explains these findings. Finally, we argue that perpetual futures may en-
hance financial stability by improving crisis-time liquidity and substantially reducing
the drawdowns of arbitrage strategies.
∗University of British Columbia, Sauder School of Business.
†The Chinese University of Hong Kong (CUHK) Business School.
We are grateful to the faculty at Carnegie Mellon University, CUHK, McGill University, and UBC, and
to Yoontae Jeon for their valuable insights, helpful comments, and suggestions. We would also like to
acknowledge the support of Aquanow, the MITACS Accelerate program, and the SSHRC who provided
funding for this research.
1
1. Introduction
Cryptocurrency exchanges have evolved into massive and largely unregulated financial
markets. Leading venues such as Binance report hundreds of billions of dollars in annual
trading volume and are valued in the tens of billions of dollars. 1 Despite their scale, cryp-
tocurrency markets remain highly volatile and fragile. Whereas the US stock market has
experienced only four daily drops exceeding 10% over the past century, cryptocurrency mar-
kets have recorded more than fifty such declines in just the past decade. 2 The fragility of
this asset class is further evidenced by the frequent failures of major exchanges, including
Mt. Gox and FTX, and the collapse of cryptocurrencies themselves, such as Terra/LUNA
and Mantra.
Despite this volatile environment, speculators eager for leverage have made cryptocurrency
futures contracts extremely popular. Most cryptocurrency trading does not take place on a
blockchain. Instead, trading volume is concentrated on centralized exchanges like Binance
and takes place using perpetual futures contracts.
Unlike standard futures, which converge to the spot price via a single transfer at maturity,
perpetual futures enforce convergence through frequent, small payments between long and
short positions. If the futures price is below the spot, shorts pay longs; if it is above, longs
pay shorts. On BitMEX, for example, these funding payments occur every eight hours and
are based on the average price difference over that interval. This structure imposes persistent
convergence pressure, keeping perpetual futures closely aligned with their underlying, and
as a result the actual funding payments are generally small.
We use data on perpetual futures and standard quarterly futures from cryptocurrency
markets to establish several empirical facts. First, perpetual futures rapidly gained popu-
1For instance, Binance routinely reports daily volumes exceeding $30 billion, raised $2 billion from a UAE
sovereign wealth fund in early 2025, and maintains an associated token (BNB) with a market capitalization
of $80 billion.
2Author’s calculations using daily Coinbase data.
2
larity across many venues. These contracts were introduced by BitMEX in May 2016, as
the end result of an evolution from quarterly to monthly to weekly and even daily futures.
This contractual form quickly came to dominate BitMEX and has since displaced standard
futures as the dominant instrument for cryptocurrency derivatives on every major non-U.S.
venue, with U.S. regulators considering allowing this form.
Second, perpetual futures are more liquid than quarterly futures, with spreads that are
49–83% tighter than comparable quarterly futures. Although this liquidity advantage partly
reflects their overwhelming popularity, our analysis shows that perpetual futures offered su-
perior liquidity even immediately following their introduction, suggesting inherent structural
advantages. Further, we show that standard futures are less liquid farther from maturity.
Third, we document a shift in trader liquidations from quarterly to perpetual futures.
Perpetual futures exhibit frequent liquidations throughout, whereas quarterly futures show
frequent liquidations prior to the introduction of perpetual futures and fewer afterward. This
is consistent with higher-risk traders showing a stronger preference for perpetual futures.
Fourth, we find that perpetual futures exhibit lower risk than quarterly futures during
large spot price movements. Quarterly futures prices decline 8–10% more than spot prices
during large market events, while perpetual futures decline just 3% more than spot prices.
The tendency of quarterly futures to overshoot spot price movements makes them riskier
than perpetual futures.
We emphasize that such a divergence between futures and spot prices is particularly
hazardous for arbitrageurs engaged in futures-spot-basis trades. These traders buy the spot
asset and hedge that by selling futures (or vice versa) using leverage, a strategy that makes
them extremely vulnerable to diverging spot and futures prices. Perpetual futures show
drawdowns that are about one-third the size of those shown by quarterly futures; moreover,
the perpetual futures drawdowns quickly mean revert while the quarterly futures drawdowns
persist. These results have financial stability implications as futures-spot-basis arbitrage is
3
a key stabilizer in many markets, including U.S. Treasuries, equity indices, and non-crypto
currencies.
Finally, we show that perpetual futures’ liquidity advantage is even larger during times
of market volatility. Although both types of futures become less liquid around large market
movements, quarterly futures spreads increase much more than perpetual futures spreads.
We interpret these findings using a tractable theoretical model in which futures contracts
are traded by market makers, liquidity traders, and long-term hedgers. Liquidity traders and
market makers are risk-averse to mark-to-market trading losses, whereas long-term hedgers
seek to minimize the risk of a timed hedging exposure. Time-varying liquidity trader demand
drives futures price away from the spot price. Contracts with shorter maturities or continuous
funding payments (like perpetuals) better track the spot price, reducing risk. That risk
reduction increases trading volumes and welfare for both the market maker and the liquidity
trader.
Perpetual futures can also benefit hedgers. By lowering risk, these contracts reduce the
compensation demanded by market makers, lowering the hedger’s costs. Standard futures
can perfectly hedge exposures that occur at their maturities, but exposures with other tim-
ings expose hedgers to the risk that the futures price may differ from the spot price when
contracts are sold early (if they expire after the hedging need) or rolled over (if they expire
before). We show that if hedging needs are randomly assigned and not bunched to match
contract expiration, hedger welfare is better with a perpetual future than any standard
futures.
A futures price that closely tracks the spot price is well suited for some markets but poorly
suited to others. For example, a perpetual future that tracks the (low) price of natural
gas during summer does not allow a utility to hedge winter consumption. This mismatch
helps explain why trading in standard futures on physical commodities and non-investible
financial assets often spreads across multiple maturities. In contrast, as Fett and Haynes
4
(2017) document, trading in equity index and U.S. Treasury futures is heavily concentrated
on a single maturity. This pattern suggests that market participants are not hedging date-
specific exposures and instead seek general market exposure with low collateral demands,
operational simplicity, no counterparty risk, and high liquidity. As such, perpetual futures
are best suited for tradable financial underlyings.
Our study makes a novel contribution by demonstrating how perpetual futures represent
an evolutionary adaptation in contract design that specifically addresses the unique volatility
and capital constraints of cryptocurrency markets. This work is the first to comprehensively
analyze how this contractual innovation enhances market stability and liquidity by reducing
the risk of the futures price diverging from the spot price.
These results link to several lines of prior work. First, two early papers discuss perpetual
futures in traditional financial markets. Gehr (1988) documents that these contracts were
originally used by the Chinese Gold and Silver Exchange of Hong Kong and Shiller (1993)
proposes offering these futures on illiquid assets as a way to better match hedger needs and
encourage the production of long-term information. Following these early contributions, the
literature remained largely silent on perpetual contracts until their resurgence in cryptocur-
rency markets. In the cryptocurrency context, the mechanics and pricing of perpetual futures
have been discussed by Ackerer et al. (2024) and He et al. (2022), with Deng et al. (2020)
additionally constructing optimal hedging strategies in the context of exchange liquidations.
A second group of papers document persistent inefficiencies in cryptocurrency markets.
Makarov and Schoar (2020) analyze cross-exchange arbitrage and show that pricing devi-
ations in cryptocurrency markets reflect constraints on arbitrage capital and market frag-
mentation. Focusing on cryptocurrency derivatives, Christin et al. (2022) articulate an ar-
bitrage strategy using perpetual futures and link its outsized returns to speculator demand.
Schmeling et al. (2023) similarly describe futures-spot-basis arbitrage, ascribing its cause to
outsized retail demand and a scarcity of arbitrage capital. He et al. (2022) also describe
5
a speculative strategy to exploit demand imbalances. Alexander et al. (2024) document
significant—though declining—inefficiencies in cryptocurrency options markets. Ruan and
Streltsov (2022) show empirically that perpetual futures’ funding settlements increase ad-
verse selection risk in spot markets, leading to higher volumes but wider spreads. De Blasis
and Webb (2022) document seasonality and exchange opening effects in perpetual futures
liquidity. Alexander et al. (2021) show that perpetual futures improve spot market price
discovery and argue that perpetual futures serve an effective hedge against spot BTC price
movements.
Our insights on cryptocurrency futures market structure connect to broader themes in
financial economics, notably the literature on limits to arbitrage. The noise trader risk
channel we focus on builds on work by De Long et al. (1990) and Foucault et al. (2011).
We build on Shleifer and Vishny (1997a), extended by Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009),
and applied by Acharya et al. (2013) to commodity futures markets under a relative scarcity
of arbitrage capital. Our focus on futures tenor and the risk of price divergence leverages
Rutledge (1976) and Castelino and Francis (1982) who report that divergence risk increases
with time to maturity. Our paper is perhaps closest to Hazelkorn et al. (2020), who link the
difference between spot and futures prices to dealer financing costs in traditional financial
markets, and to Figlewski (1984), who examine the pricing gap between equity index futures
and their underlyings and link this to limits to arbitrage.
Finally, our paper builds on the literature on contractual innovation and evolution. As
Pagano and Roell (1990) and Catalini and Gans (2020) argue, frictions and institutional
weaknesses can spur innovation–in this case, the crisis-heavy and arbitrage-capital-light
worlds of cryptocurrency futures evolved towards contracts that derisk arbitrage. By of-
fering a new form of risk transfer, these contracts completed the futures market (Duffie and
Rahi, 1995; Allen and Gale, 1994). This innovation reduced the need for arbitrage capital
(Shen et al., 2014) and addressed unmet trader demands (Tufano, 2003) in this novel mar-
6
ket (Miller, 1986). Although completing markets may improve welfare through better risk
sharing and reduced hedging costs (Allen and Gale, 1994; Duffie and Rahi, 1995), they can
also spur destabilizing speculation or amplify liquidity shocks, particularly when arbitrage
capital is limited (Allen and Gorton, 1993; Brunnermeier and Pedersen, 2009; Shleifer and
Vishny, 1997b).
2. Futures trading under arbitrage constraints
2.1. The structure of perpetual futures
Traditional futures contracts, which we refer to as standard futures, settle via cash or
physical delivery at a predetermined maturity date. Prior to maturity, traders are credited
(or debited) based on changes in the futures price. The eventual settlement of these futures
causes the futures price converges to the price of its underlying. For futures with financial
underlyings, arbitrage typically keeps the spot price in line even prior to maturity. If the
futures price trades 2% above the spot price, an arbitrageur can buy the spot asset and short
the futures contract and earn a profit of 2% at the futures settlement (minus financing costs
and dividends, if any).
In normal conditions, this may suffice to keep prices aligned. But when arbitrage capital
is scarce or maturities are long, these forces may be too weak to constrain futures prices.
Shortening maturities increases arbitrage pressures, but extremely short maturities make it
challenging to hold long-term positions.
Perpetual futures eliminate expiry dates entirely and instead, they maintain price align-
ment through regular funding payments between long and short positions. In an idealized
form, the long pays the short at a continuous rate:
FundingPaymentt = δ(Pt − St) = δBt, (1)
7
where δ is a scaling parameter, Pt is the futures price, St is the spot price, and Bt = Pt − St
is the basis. When the futures price exceeds the spot price, the long side pays the short
side, and vice versa. These expected payments create strong price pressure: any divergence
triggers an opposing payment stream, pulling futures and spot prices together.
Larger values of δ create stronger convergence incentives, and so by adjustingδ, exchanges
can create stronger or weaker convergence pressures. Standard perpetual futures formulas
translate a 2% price dislocation into an arbitrage profit of at least 2% per day–a far stronger
incentive than 2% paid only at the maturity of a standard future that might be months away
for a quarterly future. In practice, the prospect of these payments means futures prices stay
close to spot prices, and funding payments are typically small.
Beyond varying δ, exchanges implement variations of Equation (1) to suit their own trad-
ing environments. Differences include how Pt and St are measured, the timing and averaging
of funding calculations, and modifications to reduce noise or prevent manipulation. 3
2.2. A model of futures contract structure under arbitrage frictions
We model the equilibrium design and pricing of futures contracts in an environment with
constrained arbitrage capital and heterogeneous agents.
Our model begins with the standard assumption that the underlying asset price St follows
a geometric diffusion process:
dSt = rdt + σSdY S
t , (2)
where r ≥ 0 denotes the constant risk-free rate, and Y S
t is a standard Brownian motion.
We define futures contracts using two parameters: an expiration date T and a funding
3For example, the Deribit BTC-USD perpetual uses a mark price for Pt, applies an eight-hour funding
period, shrinks the resulting payment by up to 0 .003125% × St, and caps it at 0 .0625% × St. Kraken uses
similar bounds but sets δ to target a one-day payout, bases the payment on the prior clock hour’s average
difference between a reference future and the spot price, and adjusts for volatility. BitMEX weights the
price difference over the previous eight hours, incorporates bounds, adjusts for imputed borrowing costs, and
applies a bid-ask-spread-based dampening factor. He et al. (2022) discuss the mechanics of these contracts.
8
rate δ. Standard futures are characterized by no funding δ = 0 and expiration at a fixed T ,
whereas perpetual futures have positive funding δ >0 and no expiration, T = ∞. When a
contract has a finite maturity, it settles at expiration for the spot asset price ST .
Let Pt be the price of the futures contract on that asset and soBt = Pt−St is the contract’s
basis. The contract is in zero net supply and is traded by three types of agents: a (normalized)
unit mass of long-term hedgers ( H), mass nS of liquidity traders (denoted S), and mass nM
of market makers ( M ). Hedgers seek long-term exposure, market makers provide liquidity
but face inventory risk, and liquidity traders (speculators) derive time-varying utility from
futures exposure, capturing demand shocks or belief heterogeneity. Each agent i holds xi
t
units of the contract and their wealth, Wi, evolves according to
dW i
t = xi
tdPt − xi
tδdt. (3)
Liquidity traders derive an additional benefit from futures exposure, drawing on evidence
of unbalanced speculative demand (Christin et al., 2022; Schmeling et al., 2023). Specifically,
they receive utility flowxiGS
t dt, where GS
t is the liquidity trader demand factor. This demand
factor could represent time-varying hedging needs, liquidity constraints, or sentiment. 4
We assume GS
t follows an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process, a continuous-time analogue of an
AR(1) process:
dGS
t = −ψGS
t dt + σGdY G
t , (4)
where Y G
t is a standard Brownian motion independent of Y S
t . The parameter ψ >0 governs
the speed at which the liquidity trader demand factor reverts to zero, whereas the parameter
σG governs its volatility.
4An equivalent interpretation of GS
t is as a belief wedge: liquidity traders hold heterogeneous beliefs
about the asset’s drift. In particular, they believe the asset follows dSt = ( GS
t + r)dt + σSdY S
t . Under
that interpretation, GS
t is the disagreement between market makers and liquidity traders about the asset’s
drift rate. This dual interpretation is standard in models of speculative trading under heterogeneous beliefs
(Harrison and Kreps, 1978).
9
Liquidity traders and market makers have mean-variance preferences over instantaneous
changes in wealth:
dW i
t − rW i
t + GS
t xiI[i = S]dt − 1
2 γiVar(dW i
t ). (5)
The variance penalty reflects either risk aversion or inventory holding costs, consistent with
the fragmented nature of cryptocurrency exchanges and constrained arbitrage capital (Gar-
leanu and Pedersen, 2011; Makarov and Schoar, 2020). We useγM to denote the risk aversion
parameter for market makers and γS for liquidity traders.
These preferences and the variation in the liquidity demand factor drive trade between
liquidity traders and market makers. Long-term hedgers do not trade and instead have
constant hedging demand xH.
We conjecture that the futures basis B depends on time t and the liquidity demand factor
GS
t . Following standard assumptions in continuous-time analysis, we take B = B(GS
t , t) to
be differentiable in t and twice continuously differentiable in GS
t .
Given that setup, we define an equilibrium as follows:
Definition 2.1 (Equilibrium). An equilibrium consists of a futures basis function B(GS
t , t),
liquidity trader strategies xS
t , and market maker strategies xM
t , such that the following
conditions hold:
1. Given B(GS
t , t), market makers choose their futures contract positions xM
t to maximize
their utilities;
2. Given B(GS
t , t), liquidity traders choose their futures contract positionsxS
t to maximize
their utilities; and
3. The market clears: xH + nM xM
t + nSxS
t = 0 for ∀t ∈ [0, T].
The following proposition characterizes the structure of a linear equilibrium in this setting.
All proofs are provided in Appendix A.
10
Proposition 2.2. There exists an equilibrium in which the futures basis is a linear function
of the liquidity trader demand factor GS
t and long-term hedger demand xH:
B = k(t)GS
t + j(t)xH. (6)
In the proof, we derive closed-form expressions for the coefficients k(t) and j(t). The
liquidity trader price coefficient is given by
k(t) = nS/γS
nS/γS + nM /γM
| {z }
Proportional risk-aversion
1 − e(ψ+δ)(t−T )
ψ + δ| {z }
Liquidity factor risk
(7)
and the long-term hedger price coefficient by
j(t) = 1
nS/γS + nM /γM
| {z }
Aggregate risk-aversion
 
σ2
Gk2(t) + σ2
S
 1 − eδ(t−T )
δ .
| {z }
Hedger demand risk sensitivity
(8)
The comparative statics of the price coefficients are intuitive. A shorter time to maturity
(T − t), a higher funding rate ( δ), faster mean reversion in liquidity trader demand ( ψ),
lower market maker risk aversion ( γM ), or a greater number of market makers ( nM ) all
attenuate both the liquidity trader and hedger price coefficients. Higher liquidity trader risk
aversion (γS) or a smaller mass of liquidity traders ( nS) reduces the liquidity trader price
coefficient and has an indeterminate effect on the hedger price coefficient: while liquidity
traders create price risk for market makers, they also absorb some of the hedger demand.
Lower volatility of the underlying asset ( σ2
S) or of liquidity demand shocks ( σ2
G) reduces the
hedger price coefficient but does not affect the liquidity trader price coefficient, since both
types of trading agents are averse to this volatility. In equilibrium, this volatility affects the
trading volume between liquidity traders and market makers but does not affect the price.
11
In the case of standard futures, j(t) is replaced by its limit as δ → 0, yielding
Bt = nS/γS
nS/γS + nM /γM
1 − eψ(t−T )
ψ GS
t + 1
nS/γS + nM /γM
 
σ2
Gk2(t) + σ2
S

(t − T )xH. (9)
For the standard future, the liquidity trader and long-term hedger price coefficients both
monotonically converge to zero as t → T and the future approaches expiration.
For perpetual futures, we take the limit as T → ∞, yielding
Bt = nS/γS
nS/γS + nM /γM
1
ψ + δ GS
t + 1
nS/γS + nM /γM
 
σ2
Gk2(t) + σ2
S
 1
δ xH. (10)
Because perpetual contracts have no expiration date, this basis does not converge to zero
at a fixed time. However, the funding rate δ disciplines deviations from the spot price. As
shown in the expression, a sufficiently large δ can shrink the basis arbitrarily close to zero.
For the general contract, the equilibrium liquidity trader positions are given by
xS
t = 1
nS
1
γM /nM + γS/nS
1
σ2
Gk2(t) + σ2
S
GS
t − 1
nS
γM /nM
γM /nM + γS/nS xH (11)
and the market maker positions by
xM
t = − 1
nM
1
γM /nM + γS/nS
1
σ2
Gk2 + σ2
S
GS
t − 1
nM
γS/nS
γM /nM + γS/nS xH. (12)
The first terms in each expression capture trading between liquidity traders and market
makers. It is driven by the incentive to trade ( GS
t ), reduced by total risk ( σ2
Gk2(t) +σ2
S) and
the aggregate risk aversion of the two groups ( γM /nM + γS/nS). The second terms reflect
the hedging demand from long-term hedgers, which is allocated between liquidity traders
and market makers according to their risk tolerance.
Because hedging demand xH is constant, trading is driven by market makers and liquidity
12
traders and instantaneous trading volume is therefore proportional to
1
γM /nM + γS/nS
1
σ2
Gk2(t) + σ2
S
σ2
G. (13)
Lower basis volatility increases risk-bearing capacity for both market makers and speculators,
and so many of the comparative statics of k(t) carry over: trading volume is higher when
market makers are less risk averse (γM is lower), more numerous (nM is higher), or when the
contract has a shorter time to maturity ( T is lower) or a higher funding rate ( δ), or when
there is faster mean reversion in liquidity trader demand ( ψ). Although higher volatility
in liquidity trader demand ( σG) increases price impact, the net effect of increasing that
volatility is a rise in trading activity because fluctuations in GS
t directly drive trades.
The effect of liquidity trader risk bearing is more nuanced. A lower risk aversion ( γS)
or larger mass ( nS) increases demand for trade, but also raises basis volatility, deterring
participation. When liquidity traders are sufficiently risk averse (or few in number), the first
effect dominates, and reducing γS (or increasing nS) increases trading volume. However, the
second effect can also prevail, with increasing liquidity trader risk bearing raising volatility
to the point where market makers are deterred from participating–an effect akin to the
limits-of-arbitrage mechanism described in Shleifer and Vishny (1997a).
We now present our main result, which is that both liquidity traders and market makers
prefer well designed perpetual futures over delivery contracts.
Corollary 2.3. The utilities of both liquidity traders and market makers are increasing in the
funding rate δ. For any standard futures contract with expiration T , there exists a threshold
δ such that liquidity traders and market makers prefer the perpetual futures contract if and
only if δ ≥ δ.
We conclude our model by analyzing the preferences of long-term hedgers. Hedgers are
born at a constant rate xH/l, live for a fixed durationl, and maintain unit exposure to futures
13
throughout their lifetime. Each hedger has mean-variance preferences over the difference
between their wealth and the spot price of the asset at the time of death.
A sufficiently risk-averse hedger prefers a futures contract that matures at exactly their
exit date. However, a single futures contract cannot support every hedger’s specific needs.
We assume that there is a single tradable future at all times. In particular, we assume that
for futures contracts with fixed maturities, a futures contract maturing at time ( n + 1)T is
available for trade between nT and (n + 1)T for integer n. This stylized structure reflects
the fact that the liquidity on CME equity-index and U.S. Treasury futures concentrates in
the nearest-to-expiry contract (Fett and Haynes, 2017).
This setup mirrors equity-index and U.S. Treasury futures, where there is only a single,
near-expiry contract is liquid (Fett and Haynes, 2017).
This series of contracts allows the hedger to maintain constant exposure by rolling from
one contract to the next as older contracts expire, which is common practice on equity-index
and U.S. Treasury futures markets. For instance, a hedger born at time τ < T who lives
until time τ with T < τ+ l <2T will at time t purchase a futures contract maturing at T ,
at time T roll that future by closing it for ST and purchase a future maturing at 2 T , and at
time τ + l close that second future. For standard futures, the hedger’s terminal wealth is as
follows:
−PT,τ + ST − P2T,T
| {z }
Futures roll
+ P2T,τ +l − Sτ +l
| {z }
Early winding
+Sτ +l, (14)
where PnT,s denotes the price at time s of a futures contract maturing at nT .
The following corollary shows that appropriately set perpetual futures offer higher aggre-
gate welfare than any such series of delivery futures.
Corollary 2.4. Consider an equilibrium where a series of standard futures are offered with
the contract maturing at time (n + 1)T being tradable between nT and (n + 1)T for integer n.
There exists a single perpetual futures contract that delivers higher aggregate hedger welfare
14
than the series of standard futures.
Standard futures benefit hedgers whose needs align to those futures’ maturity dates.
However, in aggregate, that benefit is outweighed by the risk of futures rolls and early
unwindings borne by hedgers with misaligned dates. Moreover, all hedgers benefit from
the lower expected costs that arise because perpetual futures reduce the compensation that
market makers and liquidity traders demand for bearing the hedgers’ risk.
Combining Corollaries 2.3 and 2.4, we conclude that perpetual futures contracts can lower
the magnitude of the futures basis, increase trading volume, and enhance the welfare of all
three types of market participant. This result illustrates that well-designed perpetual futures
not only discipline prices through funding but also better accommodate the heterogeneity in
investor horizons, avoiding the roll frictions created by standard futures.
3. Empirical analysis
3.1. Cryptocurrency trade and orderbook data
We test our model’s predictions using a combination of aggregate market data and high-
frequency trading records. Appendix Figure B1 summarizes the product offerings of all
exchanges that launched cryptocurrency futures prior to 2019. While nearly all surviving
cryptocurrency futures exchanges now offer perpetual futures as their primary contract type,
we focus on three: BitMEX, Deribit, and Kraken.
These three exchanges are ideal for our analysis for several reasons. First, they were
the first to offer perpetual futures contracts. By the time other exchanges introduced these
contracts, perpetual futures were already arguably the market standard. Second, all three
provide complete historical trading data, which we use from each venue’s inception through
to a cutoff date of December 31, 2023. Third, and unlike the next set of adopters, these
15
three exchanges have not been credibly accused of manipulating trading data. 5
BitMEX was the first cryptocurrency exchange to offer cryptocurrency perpetual futures.
It provides both trade and top-of-the-book data for essentially its entire existence starting
November 11, 2014.
Deribit specializes in cryptocurrency options trading and was the second exchange to
adopt perpetual futures. It provides trade, liquidation, and mark-to-market pricing data
from its inception in February 2017 onward.
Kraken was the third exchange to adopt perpetual futures and the first regulated venue
to do so. It was founded as CryptoFacilities, before being aquired by U.S.-regulated Kraken
and rebranded as Kraken Futures. For simplicity, we refer to it as Kraken throughout.
Kraken provides trade, liquidation, and mark-to-market pricing data from January 1, 2018
onward.
Spot prices are taken from Coin Metrics and calculated as the median of the last traded
prices from Coinbase, Bitfinex, and Bitstamp. These are three of the longest-standing and
most liquid exchanges. We use a median to mitigate the effect of outages or anomalies;
however, these exchanges are well-aligned in price, unlike venues in jurisdictions with capital
controls (Choi et al., 2022).
Aggregate futures volume and product listing data are also drawn from Coin
Metrics and cover 20 futures exchanges, accounting for the majority of global cryptocurrency
futures activity.
Futures contract structures varied across the sample. In the initial sample period,
futures contracts were typically denominated in cryptocurrency because the early exchanges
5Our assessment of exchange credibility follows prior research identifying wash trading and fake volume,
including Chen et al. (2022), Cong et al. (2022), Bitwise’s 2019 SEC report, and the Blockchain Transparency
Institute. These studies suggest that other early perpetual futures exchanges, such as HTX and OKX, may
have provided unreliable data, making them unsuitable for our main analysis. Manipulation is a well-
documented issue in cryptocurrency markets, partly because platforms generally act as exchange, custodian,
and broker.
16
lacked access to the banking system. Inverse futures are crypto-denominated contracts
referencing the price of USD in that crypto, as opposed to USD-denominated contracts
referencing the price of cryptocurrency in USD. 6 Assets other than BTC are often BTC-
quoted, for example, a future on ETH which was quoted and settled in BTC. Somewhat less
commonly, quanto futures are based on the ratio of two currencies and paid out in a third
currency. For example, an XRP/USD future settled in BTC, whose value (in BTC) is tied
to the price of XRP in USD. Later in the sample period, most futures trading occurs using
standard futures that pair a cryptocurrency with either U.S. dollars or (more commonly) a
“stable coin” cryptocurrency that is pegged to the U.S. dollar. While these structures differ
in accounting, they have no bearing on our results. Throughout, we analyze returns in USD
and control for these structural differences.
3.2. The rise of perpetual futures
A core prediction of our model is that market participants prefer perpetual futures to stan-
dard futures. Figure 1 supports this: across the exchanges that introduced them, perpetuals
rapidly became the dominant contract type.
As the figure shows, BitMEX was the first exchange to apply the perpetual futures con-
tract to cryptocurrency and experienced a rapid shift in trading activity toward these con-
tracts.7 After their success on BitMEX, in 2018 these contracts spread to Deribit and Kraken,
who quickly saw the new contracts eclipse their established standard futures offerings. HTX,
OKX, and bitFlyer later underwent similar transitions. In all cases, perpetual futures saw
6Writing BTC-denominated contracts on USD was pioneered by ICBIT’s founder Alexey Bragin to allow
futures trading without reliance on fiat currency exchanges, as detailed in Bragin (2015). To illustrate,
suppose a trader goes long $100 (4 BTC) of a futures contract at a price of $25 per BTC and at settlement
the BTC price is $50. If she was long a conventional BTC/USD future as offered by the CME, she would
have a profit of $100 = 4 × ($50 − $25) because she had a USD-denominated long claim on 4 BTC each
of which increased by $25. If she was long a so-called inverse BTC future, she would have a profit of
2BTC= $100 × (1/25 − 1/50) because she had a BTC-denominated short claim on $100 and the dollar fell
from 1/25th of a BTC to 1 /50th.
7The temporary rebound in standard futures volume in 2017 is driven by a surge in popularity of BTC-
JPY standard futures, which did not have an associated perpetual future.
17
immediate popularity.
Exchanges like Bybit and Binance, which entered the cryptocurrency market later, almost
always started with a perpetual futures offering. In many cases, exchanges started with only
a perpetual futures offering. For example, the offshore subsidiaries of U.S.-based Coinbase
and Gemini initially offered only perpetual futures and did not offer standard futures at
all. A similar focus on perpetual futures is seen on emerging decentralized blockchain-based
derivatives platforms such as Jupiter, dYdX, and Hyperliquid, which are transparent by
nature and have perpetual futures as their only derivative offering.
A notable exception to this global trend is found in the three U.S.-based exchanges: the
CME, Coinbase Financial Markets, and ErisX (now owned by CBOE). This divergence is not
coincidental. While perpetual futures are not explicitly prohibited in the United States, their
regulatory status remains ambiguous and potentially limited by strict rules on swaps. To
date, no perpetual futures contracts have been approved by the Commodity Futures Trading
Commission (CFTC), the primary U.S. futures regulator. This may change in the future, as
the CFTC is exploring the possibility of liberalizing the regulatory framework surrounding
perpetual futures. 8
Figure 2 focuses on the months surrounding the launch of perpetual futures on BitMEX,
Deribit, and Kraken. We consider only inverse BTC futures here, because that was the
dominant quoting structure for both standard futures and the newly introduced perpetual
futures.
For each exchange, we divide BTC futures into three categories based on expiration: (i)
quarterly standard futures with calendar-quarter expirations; (ii) short-maturity standard
futures, with maturities other than quarter ends; and (iii) perpetual futures. The set of
short-maturity contracts varies across exchanges and includes monthly, weekly, 48-hour, and
even 24-hour contracts.
8See, for example, the CFTC’s request for comment on the regulation of perpetual futures.
18
The top set of subplots shows the normalized futures basis: the difference between the
futures price and the spot price, all divided by the spot price. Consistent with our model, the
basis of quarterly futures is large, volatile, and converges to zero at maturity. In Bitmex’s
case, the quarterly futures traded up to 40% above the spot price, while for Deribit and
Kraken they traded up to 8% above. Looking back at Equation (6), the larger effects we
see on BitMEX could be explained by the relatively scarce arbitrage capital (low ηM ) in the
early cryptocurrency markets.
Also consistent with the model, the short-maturity standard futures track the spot price
more closely thant the quarterly futures. The perpetual futures used by cryptocurrency
exchanges track the spot price even more closely due to their high funding rates.
The bottom row of subplots presents the number of trades by contract type. 9 The rapid
rise of perpetual futures is clearly visible on all three exchanges. Moreover, the introduction
of perpetual futures is associated with an increase in total trading activity, rather than
merely a reallocation of trades away from existing contracts. This is consistent with the
model prediction that reduced basis risk increases participation.
Also evident is that perpetual futures effectively replaced short-maturity standard futures
on all three venues. Because almost all trading occurs using perpetual futures or quarterly
futures, we drop short maturity futures from the subsequent analysis.
These patterns are unlikely to be driven by fees or margin requirements. Perpetual fu-
tures did not offer fee advantages: they had fee parity with standard futures on BitMEX
and Kraken, and were actually subject to higher fees on Deribit (perhaps explaining why
perpetual futures are associated with increasing platform volume for Kraken and BitMEX
but not Deribit).
Margin requirements are another salient contract feature that could influence trader de-
9Traded volume displays qualitatively similar patterns. We focus on trade counts rather than trade
volume due to the extreme volatility of BTC prices during the period.
19
mand. Kraken and Deribit initially launched perpetual futures with the same margin require-
ments as their standard futures, yet still experienced rapid adoption of perpetual contracts.
BitMEX offered lower margin requirements for short-maturity futures and perpetual futures
than for quarterly futures; however, the higher margin requirements for longer-maturity fu-
tures appear to have been driven by their erratic pricing behavior rather than an attempt
to steer demand.
Appendix Figure B2 confirms that elevated basis volatility in quarterly futures persists
over time, supporting the model’s prediction that perpetual futures offer more stable pricing
environments. High and unstable futures bases were present even in recent years, highlighting
that the divergence of spot and futures prices is not just a historical artifact.
3.3. Liquidity of quarterly and perpetual futures
A second prediction of the model is that the prices of high-funding-rate perpetual futures
are less sensitive to changes in demand, either from liquidity traders or hedgers. We test
this prediction using standard measures of market liquidity.
Quoted spread. As we have top-of-the-book data from BitMEX, we construct the
quoted spread at time t as
QuotedSpreadt = P ASK
t − P BID
t
P MID
t
, (15)
where P ASK
t and P BID
t denote the best ask and bid quotes at timet, and P MID
t is the midpoint
between them. For each day d, we compute the average of the quoted spread measured at
the end of each minute.
Roll Spread. We also implement the Roll (1984) estimator of transaction costs, which
infers the spread from the absolute value of the serial covariance of price changes. For day
20
d, we define this as
RollSpreadd = 2
qAUTOCOV ARt∈Nd [Pt/Pt−1]
, (16)
where
AUTOCOV ARt∈Nd[·]
 is computed over all trades on day d. We exclude symbol-day
observations with fewer than 10 trades to ensure reliability.
Effective Spread. The effective spread of a trade is twice the difference between its price
and a pre-trade reference price, signed based on which side of the trade was the aggressor:
EffectiveSpreadt = 2 ×



Pt/P Ref
t− − 1 if trade j is a buyer-initiated
1 − Pt/P Ref
t− if trade j is seller-initiated,
(17)
where P Ref
t− is the pre-trade reference price. For BitMEX, we use the midpoint from one
second before the trade as the reference price. For Kraken and Deribit, we use the exchanges’
reported mark prices, which are smoothed estimates of P Mid
t designed to be robust to manip-
ulation.10 For Deribit, we lack trade initiator flags, so we classify a trade as buyer-initiated if
it occurs above the mark price, and seller-initiated if it occurs below. To minimize bias from
imbalanced trade flow, we compute the daily effective spread as the midpoint between the
average of spread of buyer-initated trades and the average spread of seller-initiated trades.
If the average effective spread on a day is negative, we set it to zero. Finally, we discard this
measure for symbol-days with fewer than 10 buys or sells.
10Both Kraken and Deribit compute the mark price as St + EWM30[P ImpactMid
s − Ss], where EWM30[·] is
a 30-second exponentially weighted moving average, P ImpactMid
s is the midpoint between the average price
a market sell of a certain quantity would realize and the average price a market buy of that same quantity
would realize, and Ss is the exchange-defined spot reference price. Details are provided online by Kraken
and Deribit.
21
Realized spread. The realized spread of a trade is calculated similarly to the effective
spread, except that instead of using the mark price prior to the trade, we use the price of
the next trade to occur that is at least five minutes from the trade in question. As before,
we discard this measure for symbol-days with fewer than 10 buys or sells.
Table 1 reports summary statistics for our market quality metrics. We report these metrics
for quarterly futures and perpetual futures on BitMEX, Deribit, and Kraken.
The first set of columns reports our liquidity measures for BTC futures on each venue.
Across all three exchanges and all liquidity measures, perpetual futures are much more
liquid than quarterly futures. In particular, perpetual futures exhibit 5–8 times as many
daily trades and spreads that are 49–83% narrower.
The second set of columns repeats that analysis but includes all contracts. Here, the
pattern is mixed: perpetual futures continue to show higher trading volumes, but in some
cases exhibit wider average spreads. This reflects the endogenous nature of contract struc-
ture: the least liquid coins are listed only as perpetual futures and not as quarterly futures.
For example, Deribit offers quarterly futures only on BTC, ETH, and SOL–its most liquid
assets–while it lists perpetual futures on 15 different coins. Because less liquid coins have
higher spreads, the fact that perpetual futures are listed on less liquid coins means the cross
coin average liquidity is lower.
The third set of columns attempts to control for that by considering only coin-day-
exchanges where both perpetual futures and quarterly futures are listed and restricting
consideration to the most liquid contract on that coin-day-exchange. With this restricted
sample, we see a similar pattern to the first set of columns: for a given coin and venue, the
perpetual futures are more popular and more liquid, across venues and across measures.
Table 2 explores the determinants of liquidity using a panel regression design. We use
the more-liquid sample identified in the third set of columns of Table 1, considering only the
most liquid . Letting yc,v,s,t be a liquidity measure taken on day t for coin c using futures
22
contract structure s on venue v:
yc,v,s,t = β′Xs,t + υc,t + γv + εc,v,s,t. (18)
The covariate vector Xs contains contract-structure characteristics. In particular, we con-
sider an indicator for the symbol being a perpetual future (as opposed to a standard future)
and the log of one plus the number of days until the future’s expiration, with perpetual
futures set to 0. Coin–day fixed effects υc,t absorb market conditions, while venue fixed ef-
fects γv capture time-invariant platform heterogeneity. Standard errors are clustered at the
coin-month level.
Specification (1) shows that perpetual futures trade at effective spreads that are 4.6 bp
narrower than comparable quarterly futures: comparable to the magnitudes from our match-
ing exercise and large given the 10-14 bp average spreads on these contracts. Specifications
(2)–(4) rerun these effective spread tests venue-by-venue and yield qualitatively similar re-
sults. Specification (5) introduces T enor, our measure of time to maturity and confirms
the model prediction that liquidity is worse at longer maturities. Specifications (6) and (7)
repeat the tests in Specification (1) using realized spreads and Roll spreads, respectively; the
liquidity advantage of perpetual futures remains robust across these alternative metrics.
3.4. Liquidity around the introduction of perpetual futures
Our model suggests that the perpetual futures structure has intrinsically better liquidity
in markets with excess speculation. Although Tables 1 and 2 confirm the superior liquidity of
perpetual futures, these estimates are hard to interpret in light of perpetual futures’ market
dominance. The better liquidity of perpetual futures might simply reflect their current
dominance, rather than anything intrinsic to their contractual design.
To isolate the effect of contract design, Figure 3 looks back to the launch of the first
23
perpetuals. In these early days, perpetual futures were the entrants rather than the dominant
incumbents. For each of our three early adopters, it shows the Roll spreads and effective
spreads on perpetual and for front-month quarterly BTC futures.
Perpetual futures exhibit markedly tighter spreads on every exchange and for both liquid-
ity measures, even immediately after their introduction. The economic magnitudes differ.
BitMEX shows the largest gains, while Deribit and Kraken record more modest improve-
ments and more noise. These differences may be driven by the level of basis risk during these
periods. As Figure 2 shows, BitMEX introduced perpetual futures during a period when the
quarterly futures basis was high and volatile–conditions under which the model predicts that
the quarterly futures form would inhibit trading. Deribit and Kraken introduced perpetuals
when basis volatility was lower, muting the theoretical benefit of perpetual futures.
Table 3 tests how the introduction of perpetual futures impacted market quality using a
panel event study design:
yc,v,s,t =
X
i
γi I

t ∈ Quarter ic,v

I

Perpetuals

+
X
i
αi I

t ∈ Quarter ic,v

+ β′Xs,t + υc,t + γv + εc,v,s,t.
(19)
Here, yc,v,s,t is again a liquidity measure, and the variables of interest are indicator variables
for quarter and contract type. I

t ∈ Quarter ic,v

equals one if day t falls in quarter i, where
quarter 0 is the 91 days immediately after the introduction of perpetual futures on coin c on
venue v, quarter 1 is 91–181 days after, quarter ≥ 2 is more than 182 days after, and quarter
≤ −2 is greater than 91 days prior. We isolate the time-variation in liquidity differentials by
interacting these quarter indicators with an indicator variable equal to one if the contract is
a perpetual future. Other variables follow Equation 18, including the perpetual indicator,
exchange fixed effects, contract controls, and coin-month fixed effects. As before, all standard
errors are presented after clustering standard errors at the coin-month level.
24
Table 3 shows that perpetual futures have significantly lower Roll spreads and significantly
more trades than quarterly futures, even in the days following their introduction. For the
subsequent quarter and the quarters after that, perpetual futures show large improvements
on effective spread, Roll spread, realized spread, and the number of trades.
These interaction terms are not driven by a decline in the liquidity of quarterly futures.
quarterly futures liquidity is mostly unchanged, with the Roll spread shrinking and the
number of trades growing later in the sample.
3.5. Liquidations
Another notable feature of cryptocurrency markets is the prevalence of large, forced liq-
uidiations. Although data on liquidations in traditional futures markets is lacking, anecdotal
evidence suggests liquidations are much more prevalent in cryptocurrency. One driver of
this may be that cryptocurrency futures exchanges are non-recourse for both perpetual and
quarterly futures, and traders commonly use position-level margin and strategically triggered
liquidations as a way to limit downside exposure. 11 That contrasts with traditional futures
markets, where futures are recourse and losing traders can not just lose their collateral but
be driven into debt.
Figure 4 reports data on the liquidations on Deribit and Kraken, the two venues for
which we have complete liquidations information. The top set of plots in each panel report
the portion of each venues’ trading volume that is accounted for by liquidation trades. On
Kraken, we see much higher levels of liquidation and what appears to be a transition of
liquidation activity from quarterly futures to perpetual futures. Before the introduction of
perpetual futures, liquidations accounted for 2.8–3.6% of quarterly futures volume. After
the introduction of perpetual futures, the prevalence of liquidations on quarterly futures
11For example, on many venues a trader could enter long position on a BTC future and fund that position
with only part of their account value. If BTC’s price fell, that trader would be liquidated, but only the part
of their account that they committed to the futures contract would be at risk.
25
plumeted to 0.3-0.7%, whereas the liquidations on perpetual futures stayed high at 1.9-3.0%.
The apparent transition of liquidations from quarterly futures to perpetual futures on
Kraken occurs despite both contracts having the same margin requirements. This is consis-
tent with the model prediction that shorter-horizon, financially-constrained traders would
prefer perpetuals and migrate toward them once offered.
On Deribit, we see no such pattern and both contracts have similar reported liquidations
accounting for 0.4–0.8% of trading volume. The SOL quarterly futures see volatile patterns,
but that is associated with the standard future being discontinued due to lack of activity. A
potential explanation for this is that Deribit is primarily an options exchange–with the risk
seeking traders on Deribit choose options, rather that poorly capitalized futures positions.
The bottom plots in each of Figure 4’s panels show the effective spread at which those
liquidations occur. Even though these are forced sales, the price impact is limited, with
spreads of only a few basis points. Consistent with the rest of the paper, the spreads are
higher for standard futures than for perpetual futures. Liquidations (a demand shock) has a
smaller effect on the perpetual futures price than on the standard futures price, in the model
this is driven by perpetual future’s lower liquidity trader price coefficient.
4. Futures contract structure and market stress
4.1. Futures returns during market stress
The cryptocurrency market, with its frequent manias and panics, offers a rich laboratory
to study how futures perform in times of market stress. Figure 5 assesses the risk created by
basis movements by reporting the returns to spot, futures, and arbitrage positions. We focus
on BTC contracts on BitMEX, because it has the longest continuous history of perpetual
futures and because it reports quoted spreads.
Our analysis focuses on hourly periods in which the spot BTC price changed by more
26
than 5%. In these moves, the spot BTC prices move by an average of 5.8% within two
hours. Such moves indicate severe market stress as throughout our sample, BTC comprised
the bulk of total crypto-market capitalization. For context, the worst single-day declines of
the 2008 financial crisis were roughly 7–8%. Every futures contract has a long and a short
side, and these charts are based on the losses borne by the losing side–i.e., returns to short
(long) positions when the price rises (falls).
The left plots reports the returns to four strategies that each maintain a constant no-
tional exposure to BTC: (i) a spot position, (ii) BitMEX’s original XBTUSD perpetual
future, (iii) the front-quarter (nearest-maturity) standard future, and (iv) the second-nearby
(second-nearest-maturity) standard future. All four strategies incur sharp drawdowns, but
all the three futures strategies have greater peak losses than the spot strategy. The front
quarterly quarterly futures lose 8% (0.5 percentage points) more than the spot strategy and
the second-nearby standard future overshoots by 10% (0.6 percentage points). Perpetual
futures prices stay closer to the spot prices and so the perpetual futures strategy only over-
shoots by 3% (0.1 percentage points). Strong arbitrage pressure keeps the perpetual futures
price close to the spot price, even during these extreme minutes.
The two quarterly futures contracts suffer similar losses, despite the front quarterly futures
contract being far more liquid than the second-nearby standard future. This is inconsistent
with liquidity-stories, but entirely consistent with the model. Under the model, the initial
overshoot of the futures prices is driven by changes in the liquidity trader demand, whether
due to sentiment swings or simply liquidations (e.g., of the optimists). If liquidity trader
demand shifts are not persistent, this shock will have a similar effect on both the front and
second-nearby quarterly futures.
Remarkably, within 16 hours of the shock the perpetual-futures position has lost less
than the spot strategy. This cushioning comes from funding: once the futures–spot gap
opened, the losing side of the perpetual futures contract began receiving transfers from
27
the winning side, partially offsetting the losing sides losses. quarterly futures amplify spot
shocks; perpetual futures, through funding, dampen them.
The right plot on Figure 5 shows the losses of BTC basis arbitrage trades, where futures
positions are hedged using offsetting spot positions. This type of spread trade is popular
both in cryptocurrency and in traditional finance, for example, the treasury cash-futures
basis trade or the covered interest parity trade. In the long term, these arbitrage strategies
converge to a nearly risk-free profit. In practice, they can realize large losses when markets
are under stress.
We again plot the returns to the losing side of these basis trades. To reflect the prevalence
of leverage in these trades (e.g., Siriwardane et al. (2022)), we have scaled these arbitrage
trades by 10 to reflect hypothetical 10-times leverage and assumed 10% annual interest for
spot leg. In our data, this basis trade loses 4.3-4.6% in the two hours surrounding the
> 5% spot drawdowns if it is conducted using the quarterly futures contracts. Using the
perpetual future reduces that peak drawndown to 1.5%, a roughly two-thirds reduction that
is consistent with the reduction in divergence. As before, the losses are not only less severe,
the are also shorter lived.
By reducing basis risk, perpetual futures reduce the losses arbitrageurs bear in crises.
This might ease the pressure on the financial system, as large arbitrage drawdowns can
amplify market turmoil (Edwards, 1999; Glicoes et al., 2024). Because arbitrage capital and
market liquidity are tightly linked (Mitchell and Pulvino, 2012; R¨ osch, 2021), broader use of
perpetuals could also bolster liquidity in stressed conditions.
4.2. Futures liquidity during market stress
The limits to arbitrage are particularly acute during crises. Figure 6 illustrates the rela-
tionship between liquidity and market stress by showing the median quoted (bid-ask) spread
of BitMEX BTC-USD futures around the same set of 5% hourly spot price movements. We
28
plot large price increases (left-plot) and decreases (right-plot) separately.
For perpetual futures, the quoted spread climbs only modestly: in the two hours around a
> 5% spot rally it averages 0.66 bp, just 34% above the 0.49bp baseline observed 1–12 hours
earlier. A comparable 25% widening (0 .49 − −0.66bp) occurs during spot declines. The
front future has worse initial liquidity and suffers far larger liquidity deterioration, its spread
jumping 161% on the rallies (1 .66 − −4.36bp) and 249% on the sell-offs (1 .44 − −5.03bp).
The second-nearby quarterly future begins with spreads roughly twice those of the front
standard future (3.19—3.39bp). After the shock, its spread widens less than the front stan-
dard future in percentage terms (115—161% versus 161—249%) but more in absolute terms
(1.42—2.10bp versus 0.61—1.12bp). This suggests that the better crisis performance of the
perpetual future may not be solely driven by its better overall liquidity: the perpetual fu-
ture has far better performance than the somewhat-less-liquid front quarterly future, while
the front quarterly future performs has only slightly better relative performance than the
somewhat-less-liquid second quarterly future.
Table 4 formally tests these relationships by comparing the liquidity of perpetual and
quarterly futures. We test whether the liquidity advantage of perpetual futures holds during
periods of market stress, using minute-level spreads and a panel regression with stress-by-
contract interactions. We focus on the BitMEX exchange because it reports quoted spreads
and BTC futures because of their superior liquidity. Here, the liquidity measure in minute
t in month m using futures contract structure s is
ys,m,t =αP I[Perpetuals] + γP I[Perpetuals] × Υt
+ αBI[Back-months,t] + γBI[Back-months] × Υt
+ γt + νs + ϵs,m,t, (20)
where Υ t is a minute-level measure of market stress defined as either the absolute change
29
in the log spot BTC price for minute (Current volatility) or the average of such minute-
level absolute changes over the prior 15 minutes (Past volatility). For clarity, we scale
Υt to be in percentage terms. Our variable of interest is this measure of market stress
interacted with dummies indicating perpetual futures or back-month (non-nearest expiring)
quarterly futures. Minute-level fixed effects γt absorb variation in Υ t and symbol-level fixed
effects νs absorb variation at the contract level, meaning the interaction of market stress
and the perpetual (or back-month futures) futures form is identified by the extent to which
the futures spread of the contract structure differentially respond to market stress. Other
variable definitions mirror Equation 19, with standard errors clustered at the month-level.
In Specifications (1) and (2), we see that perpetual futures spreads shrink relative to
front month quarterly futures spreads immediately following periods of high spot BTC price
volatility. This holds both when we look at log of quoted spreads plus one basis point (Spec-
ification 1) or quoted spreads (Specification 2). These effects are economically meaningful–a
one standard deviation increase in past volatility (0.057) translates into a 10 bp (0.23 log)
increase in the spread of the front quarterly future relative to the perpetual future. The
effects in periods of peak market stress are even more pronounced, with a movement from
the median (0.048) to the 99th percentile (0.28) of past volatility translating into 42 bp
(0.94 log) increase in the front quarterly futures relative spread. Although the back-month
quarterly future is much less liquid than the front-month future, we do not see statistically
significant market-stress-liquidity interactions.
In Specifications (3) and (4), we repeat these tests using within-minute absolute price
movements. This measure captures the spread at the end of the minutes in which there
were large price movements. We see similar effects to the measure of past volatility: in
the minutes with the largest market movements, the front-month quarterly futures spread
increases significantly and the back-month shows only a limited change. Importantly, the
minute-level price changes are measured based on spot BTC, somewhat reducing the concern
30
that our measures are contaminated.
5. Conclusion
Perpetual futures maintain alignment with underlying assets through regular “funding
rate” payments exchanged between long and short positions. While standard futures con-
verge to spot prices only at maturity, perpetual futures achieve continuous convergence
through their funding payment mechanism. Analysis of cryptocurrency exchange data
demonstrates that perpetual futures consistently track spot prices more closely than their
quarterly counterparts.
These contracts now dominate trading on every major non-U.S. venue and, even after
accounting for their popularity, exhibit superior market quality. In particular, perpetual
futures remain more liquid during periods of market instability.
Tighter alignment between spot and futures prices reduces risk. Following large spot
price movements, quarterly futures exhibit losses 8–10% greater than the spot decline, while
perpetual futures move nearly one-for-one with spot. This price divergence is particularly
hazardous for arbitragers conducting basis trades because quarterly futures strategies impose
crisis drawdowns that are three times as large as perpetual futures strategies.
We build a continuous-time model of financially constrained arbitrageurs to rationalize
these facts. Funding rate payments increase arbitrage pressure and cause the futures price to
closely track the spot price. Reducing the risk of price divergence reduces the compensation
arbitrageurs demand, leading to more trade and higher welfare. Hedgers benefit from these
reduced costs and can also benefit from better hedging. Hedger risk is minimized by standard
futures whose expiration perfectly coincides with their hedging needs, however, those needs
may not coincide with the maturity of the standard futures. Because of these misaligned
hedgers, perpetual futures can improve aggregate hedger welfare by reducing the risk of
rolling futures or closing them prior to maturity.
31
Our results suggest that perpetual futures emerged as a contractual innovation tailored
to the volatile, arbitrage-capital-constrained environment of cryptocurrency markets. The
success of this contractual form in this challenging setting highlights its potential as a finan-
cial innovation. This has important policy implications, particularly as the CFTC considers
whether to permit perpetual futures in U.S. markets.
32
References
Acharya, V. V., Lochstoer, L. A., and Ramadorai, T. (2013). Limits to arbitrage and hedging:
Evidence from commodity markets. Journal of Financial Economics , 109:441–465.
Ackerer, D., Hugonnier, J., and Jermann, U. (2024). Perpetual futures pricing. Technical
report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Akey, P., Robertson, A., and Simutin, M. (2022). Noisy factors. Rotman School of Manage-
ment Working Paper Forthcoming .
Alexander, C., Chen, X., Deng, J., and Wang, T. (2024). Arbitrage opportunities and
efficiency tests in crypto derivatives. Journal of Financial Markets , 71:100930.
Alexander, C., Deng, J., and Zou, B. (2021). Hedging with bitcoin futures: The effect of
liquidation loss aversion and aggressive trading. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.01261 .
Allen, F. and Gale, D. (1994). Financial innovation and risk sharing . MIT press.
Allen, F. and Gorton, G. (1993). Churning bubbles. The Review of Economic Studies ,
60(4):813–836.
Bragin, A. (2015). Inverse futures in bitcoin economy. Available at SSRN 2713755 .
Brunnermeier, M. K. and Pedersen, L. H. (2009). Market liquidity and funding liquidity.
The review of financial studies , 22(6):2201–2238.
Castelino, M. G. and Francis, J. C. (1982). Basis speculation in commodity futures: The
maturity effect. The Journal of Futures Markets (pre-1986) , 2(2):195.
Catalini, C. and Gans, J. S. (2020). Some simple economics of the blockchain. Communica-
tions of the ACM , 63(7):80–90.
33
Chen, J., Lin, D., and Wu, J. (2022). Do cryptocurrency exchanges fake trading volumes? an
empirical analysis of wash trading based on data mining. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics
and its Applications , 586:126405.
Choi, K. J., Lehar, A., and Stauffer, R. (2022). Bitcoin microstructure and the kimchi
premium. Available at SSRN 3189051 .
Christin, N., Routledge, B. R., Soska, K., and Zetlin-Jones, A. (2022). The crypto carry
trade. CMU Working Paper .
Cong, L. W., Li, X., Tang, K., and Yang, Y. (2022). Crypto wash trading. Technical report,
National Bureau of Economic Research.
De Blasis, R. and Webb, A. (2022). Arbitrage, contract design, and market structure in
bitcoin futures markets. Journal of Futures Markets , 42(3):492–524.
De Long, J. B., Shleifer, A., Summers, L. H., and Waldmann, R. J. (1990). Noise trader risk
in financial markets. Journal of political Economy , 98(4):703–738.
Deng, J., Pan, H., Zhang, S., and Zou, B. (2020). Minimum-variance hedging of bitcoin
inverse futures. Applied Economics, 52(58):6320–6337.
Duffie, D. and Rahi, R. (1995). Financial market innovation and security design: An intro-
duction. Journal of Economic Theory , 65(1):1–42.
Edwards, F. R. (1999). Hedge funds and the collapse of long-term capital management.
Journal of Economic Perspectives , 13(2):189–210.
Fett, N. and Haynes, R. (2017). Liquidity in select futures markets. White paper. Office of
the Chief Economist, United States Commodity Futures Trading Commission .
34
Figlewski, S. (1984). Hedging performance and basis risk in stock index futures. The Journal
of Finance, 39:657–669.
Foucault, T., Sraer, D., and Thesmar, D. J. (2011). Individual investors and volatility. The
Journal of Finance , 66(4):1369–1406.
Garleanu, N. and Pedersen, L. H. (2011). Margin-based asset pricing and deviations from
the law of one price. The Review of Financial Studies , 24(6):1980–2022.
Gehr, A. K. (1988). Undated futures markets. Journal of Futures Markets , 8(1):89–97.
Glicoes, J., Iorio, B., Monin, P., and Petrasek, L. (2024). Quantifying treasury cash-futures
basis trades. FEDS Notes , 3(2024):8–3.
Harrison, J. M. and Kreps, D. M. (1978). Speculative investor behavior in a stock market
with heterogeneous expectations. The Quarterly Journal of Economics , 92(2):323–336.
Hazelkorn, T. M., Moskowitz, T. J., and Vasudevan, K. (2020). Beyond basis basics: Liquid-
ity demand and deviations from the law of one price. Technical report, National Bureau
of Economic Research.
He, S., Manela, A., Ross, O., and von Wachter, V. (2022). Fundamentals of perpetual
futures. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06888 .
Makarov, I. and Schoar, A. (2020). Trading and arbitrage in cryptocurrency markets.Journal
of Financial Economics , 135(2):293–319.
Miller, S. M. (1986). Financial innovation, depository-institution deregulation, and the
demand for money. Journal of Macroeconomics, 8(3):279–296.
Mitchell, M. and Pulvino, T. (2012). Arbitrage crashes and the speed of capital. Journal of
Financial Economics, 104(3):469–490.
35
Pagano, M. and Roell, A. (1990). Trading systems in european stock exchanges: current
performance and policy options. Economic policy, 5(10):63–116.
Roll, R. (1984). A simple implicit measure of the effective bid-ask spread in an efficient
market. The Journal of finance , 39(4):1127–1139.
R¨ osch, D. (2021). The impact of arbitrage on market liquidity. Journal of Financial Eco-
nomics, 142(1):195–213.
Ruan, Q. and Streltsov, A. (2022). Perpetual futures contracts and cryptocurrency market
microstructure. Available at SSRN 4218907 .
Rutledge, D. J. (1976). A note on the variability of futures prices. The Review of Economics
and Statistics , pages 118–120.
Schmeling, M., Schrimpf, A., and Todorov, K. (2023). Crypto carry. Available at SSRN
4268371.
Shen, J., Yan, H., and Zhang, J. (2014). Collateral-motivated financial innovation. The
Review of Financial Studies , 27(10):2961–2997.
Shiller, R. J. (1993). Measuring asset values for cash settlement in derivative markets: hedo-
nic repeated measures indices and perpetual futures. The Journal of Finance , 48(3):911–
931.
Shleifer, A. and Vishny, R. W. (1997a). The limits of arbitrage. Journal of Finance .
Shleifer, A. and Vishny, R. W. (1997b). The limits of arbitrage. The Journal of finance ,
52(1):35–55.
Siriwardane, E., Sunderam, A., and Wallen, J. L. (2022). Segmented arbitrage. Technical
report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
36
Tufano, P. (2003). Financial innovation. Handbook of the Economics of Finance , 1:307–335.
37
Figure 1: Rise of perpetual futures across exchanges.
This figure shows the share of futures volume accounted for by perpetual futures on the twenty
cryptocurrency exchanges covered by Coin Metrics. These exchanges represent the bulk of global
cryptocurrency futures volume. For BitMEX, Kraken, and Deribit, we use our own scraped data;
for all other exchanges, we rely on Coin Metrics.
38
Figure 2: Futures markets around the introduction of perpetual futures.
This figure reports key features of Bitcoin (BTC) futures markets on BitMEX, Deribit, and Kraken
around the time each introduced perpetual futures contracts. We group contracts into three cate-
gories: (i) quarterly futures, which have standard calendar-quarter expirations; (ii) short-maturity
standard futures, including contracts with monthly, weekly, 48-hour, or daily expirations; and (iii)
perpetual futures. The top set of panels show the weekly average basis for each contract type nor-
malized by the spot price, measured as the ratio of the futures price to its spot underlying minus
one. The bottom plots show the share of daily trades accounted for by each contract type.
39
Figure 3: Futures market quality following perpetual future introduction.
This figure reports the liquidity of Bitcoin (BTC) futures markets on BitMEX, Deribit, and Kraken
around the time each introduced perpetual futures contracts. We group contracts into three cate-
gories: (i) quarterly futures, which have standard calendar-quarter expirations; (ii) short-maturity
standard futures, including contracts with monthly, weekly, 48-hour, or daily expirations; and (iii)
perpetual futures. The top set of panels show the Roll spread in basis points, computed as twice
the square root of the autocorrelation of relative price changes. The bottom set of panels show the
effective spread in basis points, which is the average amount that liquidity takers overpay relative
to a fair pre-trade price. For this chart only, we set the effective spread equal to 1/2 of a basis
point for days where the effective spread is negative, to allow for the use of logorithmic scales.
40
Figure 4: Liquidations by product type.
This figure shows the portion of weekly volume that is liquidations using Deribit (panel a) and
Kraken (panel b) data. The top panel reports dollar-weighted monthly averages. Each line marks
the percentage of trades in a given month that are liquidations for a different type of contract.
The bottom panel shows the effective spread on liquidation trades. Monthly futures includes both
monthly and quarterly futures. The dotted vertical line marks the introduction of perpetual futures.
Panel a: Deribit
Panel b: Kraken
41
Figure 5: Crisis returns of futures and hedged arbitrage strategies.
This figure shows the average cumulative returns of various futures strategies around the time
of > 5% absolute spot price movements. We consider the BTC-USD set of BitMEX contracts
for events in the 2015-2023 period where both perpetual futures and two quarterly futures were
available. If multiple > 5% absolute changes occur, we consider the first such change in a 36-hour
period. The left plot shows the cumulative returns of a strategy that holds $100 spot BTC (using
the average of Coinbase, Bitstamp, and Bitfinex prices) and the cumulative returns to portfolios
with the same BTC exposure constructed using BitMEX XBTUSD perpetual futures, front month
(closest-maturing) futures, and second nearby (second closest-maturing) quarterly futures. The
right panel shows the returns to arbitrage strategy that buys spot BTC and shorts the respective
future with 10X leverage. Each line presents the cumulative cash-flows to the losing side of each
trade, e.g., a long BTC trade around price decreases and a short BTC trade around price increases.
We plot 15-minute averages of 1-minute cross-scenario medians.
42
Figure 6: Quoted spreads of futures around the time of price jumps.
This figure shows the median quoted spread of various types of futures around the time of > 5%
hourly spot price increases (left plot) and < −5% spot price decreases (right plot). We consider
BTC-USD BitMEX contracts for market movements in the 2015-2023 period where both perpetual
futures and two quarterly futures were available. If multiple > 5% changes occur, we consider the
first such change in a 36-hour period. Each line presents the quoted (bid-ask) spread for a type of
contract. We plot rolling 5-minute averages of 1-minute cross-event medians.
43
Table 1: Summary of market quality measures.
This table reports averages of liquidity metrics for standard quarterly futures and perpetual futures
across BitMEX, Deribit, and Kraken. The first set of columns summarizes the entire sample and the
second set of columns summarizes matched pairs of standard and perpetual futures. This matching
pairs each quarterly future symbol-day with the perpetual future which has a number of trades
closest to the quarterly future’s number of trades, considering only matches within venue-coin-
month and provided there exists a matching future with 70-120% the number of trades. Differences
are tested using standard errors clustered at the coin-month level. ***, **, and * denote statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
BTC All coins Matched coin-days
Qtly. Perp. Diff. Qtly. Perp. Diff. Qtly. Perp. Diff.
BitMEX
Observations 3,069 2,788 -281 12,335 17,557 5,222 7,284 7,962 678
Distinct coins 1 1 0 12 31 19 8 8 0
Distinct symbols 54 3 -51 199 64 -135 132 17 -115
Daily trades 3,716 35,193 31,477 ∗∗∗ 1,905 8,181 6,276 ∗∗∗ 2,022 17,424 15,402 ∗∗∗
Effective spread (bp) 14.4 2.1 -12.3 ∗∗∗ 19.9 12.2 -7.7 ∗∗∗ 9.7 3.6 -6.1 ∗∗∗
Roll spread (bp) 28.3 3.8 -24.5 ∗∗∗ 31.8 26.4 -5.3 ∗ 22.3 9.7 -12.6 ∗∗∗
Realized spread (bp) 19.2 2.8 -16.4 ∗∗∗ 24.5 21.7 -2.8 16.9 7.5 -9.5 ∗∗∗
Kraken
Observations 2,045 1,938 -107 9,063 29,053 19,990 8,657 9,289 632
Distinct coins 1 1 0 5 54 49 5 5 0
Distinct symbols 27 2 -25 134 60 -74 129 11 -118
Daily trades 602 8,454 7,852 ∗∗∗ 310 1,205 895 ∗∗∗ 318 3,178 2,860 ∗∗∗
Effective spread (bp) 9.2 2.7 -6.5 ∗∗∗ 14.1 11.8 -2.3 ∗∗∗ 14.0 6.9 -7.1 ∗∗∗
Roll spread (bp) 12.4 4.7 -7.7 ∗∗∗ 29.0 36.5 7.5 ∗∗∗ 28.5 11.1 -17.4 ∗∗∗
Realized spread (bp) 7.6 3.2 -4.4 ∗∗∗ 16.7 19.2 2.6 ∗∗∗ 15.7 7.2 -8.5 ∗∗∗
Deribit
Observations 2,537 1,966 -571 4,420 9,985 5,565 3,849 3,862 13
Distinct coins 1 1 0 3 15 12 3 3 0
Distinct symbols 30 2 -28 53 18 -35 47 6 -41
Daily trades 2,378 16,165 13,787 ∗∗∗ 1,823 6,026 4,203 ∗∗∗ 1,707 15,065 13,358 ∗∗∗
Effective spread (bp) 8.3 3.9 -4.5 ∗∗∗ 10.0 16.3 6.3 ∗∗∗ 10.3 4.5 -5.8 ∗∗∗
Roll spread (bp) 7.6 2.1 -5.6 ∗∗∗ 9.6 15.7 6.1 ∗∗∗ 9.1 2.6 -6.5 ∗∗∗
Realized spread (bp) 8.8 1.3 -7.5 ∗∗∗ 11.9 9.6 -2.4 ∗∗∗ 11.6 1.9 -9.6 ∗∗∗
44
Table 2: Market quality of perpetual and delivery futures.
This table reports regressions of market quality metrics on various features for standard quarterly
futures and perpetual futures on BitMEX, Deribit, and Kraken. A data point is a symbol-exchange-
day, considering only six of the most liquid cryptocurrencies (BTC, ETH, SOL, XRP, BCH, LTC).
The dependent variable is the effective spread in basis points for Specifications (1) to (5), the
realized spread in basis points for (6), and the Roll spread in basis points for (7). Perpetual
denotes perpetual futures. Tenor is the log of one plus the contract’s maturity in days, where the
maturity of perpetual futures is assumed to be 0. Inverse, BTC-quoted, and Quanto are contract
features. Exchange refers to the futures trading venue. Standard errors are clustered at the coin-
month level. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
Realized Roll
Effective spread spread spread
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
Perpetual −4.49∗∗∗ −2.88∗∗∗ −5.39∗∗∗ −6.81∗∗∗ 0.55 −5.47∗∗∗ −5.02∗∗∗
(0.30) (0.81) (0.68) (0.89) (0.91) (0.32) (0.34)
Tenor 1 .15∗∗∗
(0.20)
Inverse 4 .19∗∗∗ −8.00 0 .74 −1.88 4 .03∗∗∗ 0.40 2 .40∗∗∗
(0.65) (6.48) (1.14) (1.78) (0.65) (0.56) (0.72)
BTC-quoted 4 .50∗∗∗ −1.40 3 .10 4 .90∗∗∗ −1.49∗∗∗ 0.94
(0.83) (2.09) (2.84) (0.83) (0.50) (0.65)
Quanto 3 .44∗∗∗ −1.59 3 .47∗∗∗ −0.95 1 .23
(0.94) (2.22) (0.94) (0.72) (0.99)
Kraken 6 .47∗∗∗ 16.43∗∗∗ 6.69∗∗∗ 0.23 4 .85∗∗∗
(0.66) (1.42) (0.66) (0.52) (0.55)
Deribit 8 .32∗∗∗ 14.77∗∗∗ 8.16∗∗∗ −0.45 0 .25
(0.83) (0.98) (0.82) (0.45) (0.41)
Coin-day FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Exchange All BitMEX Deribit Kraken All All All
Observations 54,926 21,454 11,004 22,468 54,926 54,926 54,926
R2 18.99% 13.91% 51.88% 26.00% 19.36% 11.98% 9.98%
45
Table 3: Perpetual futures introductions and market quality.
This table reports a panel event study of market quality metrics for standard quarterly futures
and perpetual futures on BitMEX, Deribit, and Kraken. A data point is a symbol-exchange-day,
considering only six of the most liquid cryptocurrencies (BTC, ETH, SOL, XRP, BCH, LTC).
The dependent variables are measures of spread (columns 1-3) and market activity (column 4).
The variables of interest are indicators for the months surrounding the introduction of perpetual
futures for that coin on that venue, with Month t being the month of introduction. The month
prior to the introduction (t − 1) is the omitted variable. The indicators for the months following the
introduction of perpetual futures are interacted with Perpetual, which is a dummy variable equal
to one for perpetual futures contracts. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% levels, respectively, for standard errors based on coin-month clustering.
Effective spread Roll Spread Realized spread # Trades
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Perpetual × Quarter 0 −2.98 −2.21∗ −4.42 0 .59∗∗∗
(2.54) (1.23) (2.89) (0.16)
Perpetual × Quarter 1 −3.36∗∗∗ −2.88∗∗ −3.51∗∗ 0.62∗∗∗
(0.67) (1.39) (1.41) (0.13)
Perpetual × Quarter ≥ 2 −4.61∗∗∗ −5.16∗∗∗ −5.44∗∗∗ 2.00∗∗∗
(0.29) (0.35) (0.33) (0.06)
Quarter ≤ −2 −3.40 −2.15 −1.92 0 .59
(5.38) (2.79) (2.89) (0.44)
Quarter 0 0 .43 2 .17 0 .21 −0.22
(3.54) (2.33) (3.80) (0.29)
Quarter 1 −2.40 −0.13 −4.39∗ 0.09
(2.40) (2.21) (2.43) (0.30)
Quarter ≥ 2 1 .42 −0.69 −7.08∗∗∗ 1.15∗∗∗
(2.19) (1.53) (2.07) (0.22)
Inverse 4 .26∗∗∗ 2.22∗∗∗ 0.04 −1.00∗∗∗
(0.67) (0.73) (0.54) (0.12)
BTC-quoted 4 .66∗∗∗ 0.76 −1.99∗∗∗ −1.61∗∗∗
(0.87) (0.66) (0.50) (0.11)
Quanto 3 .77∗∗∗ 1.01 −1.79∗∗ −0.95∗∗∗
(0.98) (1.02) (0.75) (0.16)
Coin-day FE Yes Yes Yes Yes
Exchange FE Yes Yes Yes Yes
Observations 54,926 54,926 54,926 54,926
R2 19.19% 10.20% 13.32% 66.25%
46
Table 4: Perpetual futures and market stress using high-frequency data.
This table reports the association between contractual form and market liquidity during periods
of market stress. A data point is a minute-level observation of a BTC-USD inverse future on the
BitMEX cryptocurrency exchange. The dependent variables are the log of the end of minute quoted
spread plus 1 basis point (columns 1 and 3) and the end of minute quoted spread in basis points
(columns 2 and 4). The variables of interest are the interaction between market stress measures
and indicators for futures contract forms. Past volatility is the absolute log change in spot BTC
prices averaged over the preceding 15 minutes. Current volatility is the absolute log spot BTC price
change in the current minute. Perpetual is an indicator variable equal to one for perpetual futures
contracts and Back-month is an indicator variable equal to one for standard quarterly futures that
are not the nearest to expiration future. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% levels, respectively, for standard errors based on two-way clustering at the symbol
and month level.
Log quoted Quoted Log quoted Quoted
spread spread bp spread spread bp
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Perpetual × Past volatility −4.00∗∗∗ −179.51∗∗∗
(0.91) (27.76)
Back-month × Past volatility −0.14 154 .01
(0.50) (123.91)
Perpetual × Current volatility −1.56∗∗∗ −63.88∗∗∗
(0.37) (9.63)
Back-month × Current volatility −0.10 57 .46
(0.20) (44.99)
Back-month 0 .53∗∗∗ 6.46∗ 0.53∗∗∗ 13.09∗∗
(0.16) (3.73) (0.15) (6.25)
Minute FE Yes Yes Yes Yes
Symbol FE Yes Yes Yes Yes
Observations 12,250,302 12,250,314 12,250,302 12,250,314
R2 11.31% 1.80% 9.97% 1.15%
47
Appendix A Proofs
A.1. Proof of Proposition 2.2
Proof. For an agent of type i ∈ {M, S} and her time t position of future contract xi
t, her
wealth evolves as:
dW i
t =xi
tdSt + xi
tdB
 
GS
t , t

− xi
tδB
 
GS
t , t

dt
=xi
t[(Gi
t + r)dt + σSdY S
t + Bt(.)dt − ψGS
t BG(.)dt + 1
2 σ2
GBGG(.)dt
+ σGBG(.)dY G
t − δB(.)dt],
(21)
where Bt(.) is the first order derivative with respect to t, BG(.) is the first order derivative
with respect to GS
t , and BGG(.) is the second order derivative with respect to GS
t .
For an agent of type i, she chooses the optimal xi
t to maximize her expected preference:
E[dW i
t − rW i
t + GS
t xiI[i = S]dt − γi
2 V ar(dW i
t )]. (22)
Substituting equation (21), one can solve the optimal xi
t, for i ∈ {M, S}:
xi
t = GS
t I[i = S] + Bt(.) − ψGS
t BG(.) + 1
2 σ2
GBGG(.) − δB(.)
γi (σ2
GB2
G(.) + σ2
S) . (23)
The market clearing condition xH + nSxS
t + nM xM
t = 0 suggests that
xH  
σ2
GB2
G(.) + σ2
S

+ (nM
γM + nS
γS )[Bt(.) − ψGS
t BG(.) +1
2 σ2
GBGG(.) − δB(.)] +nS
γS GS
t = 0. (24)
We conjectureB
 
GS
t , t

= k(t)GS
t +j(t)xH. Then we have Bt(.) = k′(t)GS
t +j′(t)xH; BG(.) =
48
k(t); and BGG(.) = 0. Substituting those and canceling out terms, we have
0 =[nSγM + (nSγM + nM γS)(k′ − ψk − δk)]GS
+ [(j′ − δj)(nSγM + nM γS) + γM γS(σ2
Gk2 + σ2
S)]xH.
(25)
Because in equilibrium the market clear condition always holds for any GS
t and xH. We
can solve k(t) and j(t) separately. Start with k(t), given the boundary condition k(T ) = 0
(because basis converges to 0 as t approaches T ), and nSγM +(nSγM +nM γS)(k′ −ψk −δk) =
0, one can solve the ODE:
k(t) = nSγM
nSγM + nM γS
1
ψ + δ
 
1 − e(ψ+δ)(t−T )
. (26)
Similarly, we can solve j(t) given the the boundary condition j(T ) = 0 and (j′ − δj)(nSγM +
nM γS) + γM γS(σ2
Gk2 + σ2
S) = 0:
j(t) = γM γS(σ2
Gk2 + σ2
S)
(nSγM + nM γS)δ (1 − eδ(t−T )). (27)
Thus,
Pt = St + nSγM
nSγM + nM γS
1
ψ + δ
 
1 − e(ψ+δ)(t−T )
GS
t + γM γS(σ2
Gk2 + σ2
S)
(nSγM + nM γS)δ
 
1 − eδ(t−T )
xH.
(28)
To show that the absolute basis is decreasing in both ψ and δ, we only need to show that
both k(t) and j(t) are (weakly) decreasing in both ψ and δ. That is equivalent to show that
1
x (1 − e−x(T −t)) is decreasing in x, for ∀x >0. Taking the first order derivative with respect
to x, we obtain:
d
dx
1
x (1 − e−x(T −t)) = 1
x2 [(1 + x(T − t))e−x(T −t) − 1]. (29)
49
We then want to show that (1 + x(T − t))e−x(T −t) − 1 < 0. To achieve this, notice that
(1 +x(T − t))e−x(T −t) − 1 = 0 when x = 0, and taking the first order derivative with respect
to x again, we have (T − t)e−x(T −t) − (T − t)[1 + x(T − t)]e−x(T −t) < 0, for ∀x >0.
A.2. Proof of Corollary 2.3
Proof. Given the equilibrium price equation 28 and market clear condition, we can further
obtain xi
t:
xS
t = − 1
nSγM + nM γS (γM xH − nM GS
t
σ2
Gk2 + σ2
S
), (30)
and
xM
t = − 1
nSγM + nM γS (γSxH + nSGS
t
σ2
Gk2 + σ2
S
). (31)
We then show that the trading volume is increasing in ψ and δ. Because xH is a constant,
the instantaneous trading volume can be characterized as:
| dnSxS
t
dt | = nSnM
(nSγM + nM γS)(σ2
Gk2 + σ2
S) | dGS
t
dt |
= nSnM
(nSγM + nM γS)(σ2
Gk2 + σ2
S) | −ψGS
t dt + σGdY G
t |.
(32)
Since k(t) is decreasing in both ψ and δ, the instantaneous trading volume increasing in both
ψ and δ.
From the proof of Proposition 2.2, the subjective expected utility of speculators S is
E[γS (σ2
GB2
G(.) + σ2
S)
2 (xS
t )2] =QE[(γM xH − nM GS
t
σ2
Gk2 + σ2
S
)2]
=Q[(γM xH)2 + ( nM
σ2
Gk2 + σ2
S
)2 σ2
G
2ψ ],
(33)
where Q ≡
γS(σ2
GB2
G(.)+σ2
S)
2(nS γM +nM γS ) is a constant. Because k(t) > 0 is decreasing in δ, specualtor S’s
subjective expected utility is increasing in δ. Similarly, one can prove the same result for
50
market maker M .
To prove the last result, first notice that we only need to show that for any standard
delivery contract, there exists δ such that the all perpetual future contracts with a refunding
rate higher than δ will have a lower k(t). It is straightforward to see that when δ = δ ≡
( 1
1−eψ(t−T ) − 1)ψ, the perpetual future contract and the standard delivery future share the
same basis. Then the perpetual future contracts have a lower absolute basis and higher open
interest if and only if δ ≥ δ.
A.3. Proof of Corollary 2.4
Proof. Let τ be the random birth time. We reuse k(t) and j(t) to denote k(t mod T ) and
j(t mod T ). Let H τ denote G shifted by the hedger’s random birth time, H τ
s = Gs+τ . An
agent born at time τ almost surely has total cash flow
π(τ, {H τ }) =H τ
l k(τ + l) + j(τ + l)h − H τ
0 k(τ ) − j(τ )h
−
X
n∈Z:0<T n−τ <l
 
H τ
T n−τ k(0) + j(0)h

−
ˆ τ +l
τ
δ (k(τ + t)H τ
t + j(τ + t)h) dt.
Use ¯ to denote the realized means of variables between 0 and T . Then
E[π(τ, {H τ })|{H τ }] = 1
T
ˆ T
0
π(τ, {H τ })dt
= (H τ
l − H τ
0 ) ¯k − l
 1
T
  ¯Hk (0) + j(0)h

+ δ
 ¯k ¯H + ¯jh

.
Which allows us to calculate unconditional moments
E[π] = E[E[πτ |{H}]] = −lh
 1
T j(0) + δ¯j

,
51
V ar[π] = V ar[E[πτ |{H}]] + E[V ar[πτ |{H}]]
≥ V ar[E[πτ |{H}]]
= V ar

(H τ
l − H τ
0 ) ¯k + ¯H l
T
 
k(0) + δ¯k

,
with that inequality binding for perpetual futures.
Fix T for the delivery future and consider a perpetual future with δ′ such that
1
ψ

1 − 1 − e−ψT
ψT

= 1
ψ + δ′ ,
letting ′ denote this future’s properties. By construction, we have k(0) > ¯k ≥ ¯k′ and so
1
T j(0) > δj′. Thus, this perpetual futures contract has a higher expected cash flow without
higher variance.
Appendix B Additional tables and figures
52
Figure B1: Contractual evolution of BTC futures.
This chart summarizes the futures products offerings of exchanges offering cryptocurrency futures
prior to Dec. 2018. Product offering data are sourced from the Wayback Machine - Internet
Archive, following a procedure akin to Akey et al. (2022) and by scraping the longest-living BTC
forum, BitcoinTalk.org. This chart considers only futures contracts and does not consider exchanges
offering margin loans for spot trading (e.g., the early days of Bitfinex) or bilateral bets (e.g., over-
the-counter contracts for difference or TeraExchange). This chart excludes ErisX which offered
futures trading starting 2019 and was acquired by the CBOE in 2021.
53
Figure B2: Cryptocurrency futures prices relative to spot prices.
This figure shows the daily average futures basis for the nearest two expiring quarterly BTC-USD
futures and the perpetual BTC-USD future on the cryptocurrency exchange BitMEX. The basis
for each trade is calculated as the ratio of the futures price to the price of the underlying spot asset,
minus one. The spot price is the simple average of the last traded price on Bitfinex, Coinbase, and
Coinstamp. The futures price is the mid-point at the end of the minute. The plotted basis is the
average of the minutes in two-week periods.
54
Appendix C Additional Theoretical Results
Our last result concerns the change of the speculator population. Given the high volatility
in the cryptocurrency market, liquidity traders are often wiped out of the market, resulting
in a large drop of n after a dramatic price move. The following corollary studies the effect
of massive speculative position liquidation on future market trading.
Corollary C.1. The absolute speculative basis decreases in nM
nS .
When the market power of liquidity traders drops, the speculative demand in the future
market becomes less volatile and the absolute basis shrinks. Consequently, market makers
can afford a larger inventory capacity and are willing to trade with a bigger open interest in
the future market.
C.1. Proof of Corollary C.1
Proof. From the proof of corollary 2.2, k(t) can be rewritten as
k(t) = nSγM
nSγM + nM γS
1
ψ + δ
 
1 − e(ψ+δ)(t−T )
= 1
1 + nM
nS
γS
γM
1
ψ + δ
 
1 − e(ψ+δ)(t−T )
.
(34)
Then k(t) is decreasing in nM
nS .
55