                                                                                   David Garcia, Frank Schweitzer:
                                              Royal Society Open Science 2:150288 (2015) http://rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/2/9/150288




                                                       Social signals and algorithmic trading of Bitcoin

                                                                          David Garcia, Frank Schweitzer
                                                                           Chair of Systems Design, ETH Zurich
                                                                       Weinbergstrasse 56/58, 8092 Zurich, Switzerland

                                                                                   September 25, 2015
                                                                 Published in Royal Society Open Science 2:150288 (2015)




arXiv:1506.01513v2 [cs.SI] 24 Sep 2015
                                                            http://rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/2/9/150288

                                                                                             Abstract
                                                   The availability of data on digital traces is growing to unprecedented sizes, but inferring ac-
                                               tionable knowledge from large-scale data is far from being trivial. This is especially important for
                                               computational finance, where digital traces of human behavior offer a great potential to drive trading
                                               strategies. We contribute to this by providing a consistent approach that integrates various data-
                                               sources in the design of algorithmic traders. This allows us to derive insights into the principles
                                               behind the profitability of our trading strategies. We illustrate our approach through the analysis of
                                               Bitcoin, a cryptocurrency known for its large price fluctuations. In our analysis, we include economic
                                               signals of volume and price of exchange for USD, adoption of the Bitcoin technology, and transac-
                                               tion volume of Bitcoin. We add social signals related to information search, word of mouth volume,
                                               emotional valence, and opinion polarization as expressed in tweets related to Bitcoin for more than
                                               3 years. Our analysis reveals that increases in opinion polarization and exchange volume precede
                                               rising Bitcoin prices, and that emotional valence precedes opinion polarization and rising exchange
                                               volumes. We apply these insights to design algorithmic trading strategies for Bitcoin, reaching very
                                               high profits in less than a year. We verify this high profitability with robust statistical methods that
                                               take into account risk and trading costs, confirming the long-standing hypothesis that trading based
                                               social media sentiment has the potential to yield positive returns on investment.



                                         1    Introduction
                                         Our online society generates data on the digital traces of human behavior at unprecedented scales and
                                         resolutions. This produces a data deluge, in which researchers are confronted with a vast amount of obser-
                                         vational data that is not the product of carefully designed experiments [1]. One of the main challenges of
                                         the scientific community is to develop methods to extract meaningful knowledge from that data beyond
                                         mere descriptive analyses [2]. This is particularly important in financial trading: Data can be available
                                         to all financial agents, but it is the analysis and its applications what makes a difference. Within com-
                                         putational finance, the field of algorithmic trading [3] deals with the implementation and evaluation of
                                         automatic trading strategies, which are often kept in private companies and away from publicly accessible
                                         research. The most common kind of algorithmic trading is based on the principles of technical analysis
                                         [4], using the time series of prices to formulate predictions about returns. Technical analysis is often
                                         insufficient to derive satisfactory returns [5], motivating the inclusion of large-scale social signals and the
                                         evaluation through data-driven simulations on historical data, called backtesting [6, 7]. In this article,
                                         we present a set of methods to derive stylized facts from the analysis of multidimensional economic and



                                                                                                1/19
                                          David Garcia, Frank Schweitzer:
     Royal Society Open Science 2:150288 (2015) http://rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/2/9/150288




social signals, and to apply that knowledge in the design and evaluation of algorithmic trading strategies.
We illustrate an application of our approach to algorithmic trading of the Bitcoin cryptocurrency, using
a wide variety of digital traces about economic and social aspects of the Bitcoin ecosystem.
Bitcoin (BTC) is a digital currency designed to operate in a distributed system without any central
authority, based on a cryptographic protocol that does not require a trusted third party [8]. Introduced
in a 2008 paper written under the pseudonym of Satoshi Nakamoto [9], Bitcoin serves as a technology to
transfer money quickly for negligible fees [10]. One of the first markets to adopt Bitcoin was the Silk Road,
a website where illegal commerce became possible thanks to the relative anonymity of Bitcoin [11], in line
with the evidence in search trends that relates Bitcoin usage to computer expertise and illegal activities
[12]. Since then, the use of Bitcoin has widely expanded beyond criminal activities: At the time of writing,
Bitcoin is accepted by many legal merchants and charities [13], including large businesses like Dell [14].
Bitcoin-accepting businesses, exchange markets, and wallet services compose the Bitcoin ecosystem [8],
where different kinds of agents interact, trade, and communicate through digital channels. The increasing
adoption of Bitcoin and its online nature allow us to simultaneously monitor its social and economic
aspects. Every purchase of goods or services in Bitcoin leaves a trace in a public ledger called the Block
Chain, creating a publicly accessible economic network [15]. Bitcoin’s delocalized technology aligns with
the online interaction of its users through social networks and forums, motivating its adoption by new
users through word-of-mouth [16]. Previous research has shown how search trends and Wikipedia views
are related to price changes [17] and to the speculative and monetary aspects of Bitcoin [18], leading to
dynamics that combine search interest, user adoption, word-of-mouth, and prices [16].


Contributions of this article. Based on established principles of time series analysis and financial
trading, we present a framework to derive general knowledge from multidimensional data on social and
economic aspects of a market. We apply a general statistical model to detect temporal patterns in the
co-movement of price and other signals. Those patterns are tested through a method robust to the em-
pirical properties of the analyzed data, formulating concise principles on which signals precede market
movements. We combine those principles to produce tractable trading strategies, which we evaluate over
a leave-out sample of the data, quantifying their profitability. Our approach, rather than focusing on
improving a particular method, takes a multidisciplinary stance in which we combine principles from
social psychology and economics with methods from information retrieval, time series analysis, and com-
putational finance.
We apply our framework to the Bitcoin ecosystem, monitoring the digital traces of Bitcoin users with daily
resolution. We combine economic signals related to market growth, trading volume, and use of Bitcoin as
means of exchange, with social signals including search volumes, word-of-mouth levels, emotional valence,
and opinion polarization about Bitcoin. Our results reveal which signals precede changes of Bitcoin prices,
a knowledge that we use to design algorithmic trading strategies. We evaluate the power of our strategies
through backtesting data-driven simulations, comparing returns with technical analysis strategies. As a
consequence, we test the hypothesis that social media sentiment predicts financial returns in the Bitcoin
ecosystem.


Social signals in finance. Understanding the role of social signals in finance not only has the potential
to generate significant profits, but also has scientific relevance as a research question [19]. Two different



                                                    2/19
                                          David Garcia, Frank Schweitzer:
     Royal Society Open Science 2:150288 (2015) http://rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/2/9/150288




research approaches give insights to this question: One is the statistical analysis of social and financial
signals in order to test the existence of temporal correlations that lead financial markets. The second one
applies these signals in prediction scenarios, measuring their accuracy as a validation of the underlying
behavior of the system, but not necessarily of their profitability. The statistical analysis of search engine
data reveals that search trends can predict trading volumes of individual stocks [20]. In addition, stock
prices in S&P 500 are correlated with tweet volumes [21], but the applicability of these patterns into
trading strategies is yet to be evaluated.
Sentiment in social media is closely related to socio-economic phenomena, including public opinion [22].
This motivates the application of sentiment indicators in the statistical analysis of financial data. Early
works on the sentiment in specialized forums gave negative results about their impact on returns [23].
Further research showed that emotions in private instant messaging between workers of a trading company
precede stages of market volatility [24]. The expression of anxiety in publicly accessible data from general
blogs precedes trading peaks and price drops in the S&P 500 [25], and sentiment in Twitter can be used
to predict movements in large-scale stock indices [26]. It is important to note that, to date, there is no
evidence that such sentiment-based predictions produce significant returns on investment [19].


Online Polarization. While most of previous works on sentiment in financial markets focus on di-
mensions of valence or mood, the collective phenomenon of polarization of opinions is often overlooked.
The emergence of polarization in a society gives early warnings on political and economic phenomena:
Polarization in social networks of Swiss politicians precedes controversial elections [27], and polarization
patterns in the Eurovision Song Contest appear before states of distrust in the European economy [28].
With respect to financial markets, speculation theories point to the role of diverse beliefs in financial
transactions [29], leading to the hypothesis that polarization and disagreement influence trading volumes
and prices [30]. In this line, the empirical analysis of polarization in stock message boards shows that
states of disagreement lead to increased volatility [31].


The missing link. To date, there is a significant knowledge gap between the analysis and application
of social signals to trading scenarios. Findings from statistical analyses alone are not guaranteed to lead to
profitable strategies at all [25]. For example, movements of the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) can
be predicted with mass media sentiment [32] and Twitter mood [26], but to date no research has shown
that such prediction methods can be profitable in trading scenarios. Similarly, the analysis of discussion
patterns in specialized blogs predict returns of some technology companies [33], but it is still open to
evaluate the potential returns of such a predictor. The application of methods that process arbitrarily
large datasets lead to results difficult to apply, for example the predicting power of search volumes of the
query "moon patrol" [34] in backtesting over the DJIA [6]. Furthermore, analyses of Twitter discussions
about companies can be applied in a portfolio strategy, yet its evaluation through backtesting leads
to very moderate returns and their statistical significance is not assessed [35]. In addition, no previous
research has proposed a prediction technique that derives significant returns on investment from online
sentiment data [19]. Our research aims at closing the gap between these lines of research. To do so,
we unify the statistical analysis and its application to design and evaluate trading strategies, based on
tractable principles with potential impact in the finance community.




                                                    3/19
                                            David Garcia, Frank Schweitzer:
       Royal Society Open Science 2:150288 (2015) http://rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/2/9/150288




2      Trading strategy framework
To design and evaluate trading strategies, we present a framework that uses a set of economic and social
signals related to the agents of the market under scrutiny. Among those signals, the only required one
is an economic signal of prices of an asset, namely a stock, currency, or tradable index. To understand
profitability, we convert the price time series P (t) into a return time series:

                                                             P (t) − P (t − 1)
                                            Ret(t) =                                                                    (1)
                                                                 P (t − 1)

which quantifies proportional changes in the price at every time step. The data on these signals is divided
in an analysis period and a leave-out period, as depicted in Figure 1. The division in these periods needs
to allocate enough data in the leave-out sample to provide the testing power to assess the statistical
significance of strategy profits. For daily trading, a leave-out period of about one year is usually sufficient,
but this ultimately depends on the expected profitability and variance of the trading strategies.

    Economic Signals
     Price, Volume, Trade
                                                                                                          Backtesting
      Social Signals                                                                                      evaluation
    Search, WoM, Emotions
                                          Analysis period                            Leave-out period


                                          V(t)=φV(t−1) + rt + c + ϵ                                     Trading strategy
                                       Multidimensional Model                    Impulse Analysis           design


Figure 1: Framework for analysis of social and economic signals and trading strategy de-
sign and evaluation.


Multidimensional analysis. The first step in our framework focuses on the analysis period, applying
a multidimensional model of Vector Auto-Regression (VAR) [36], which is commonly used in the analysis
of multidimensional time series in finance [23, 37, 16]. A VAR models multidimensional linear relations
with given lags, which in our analysis we set to one day. Thus, given the vector of signals V (t) we fit the
equation
                                     V (t) = φV (t − 1) + r ∗ t + c +                                   (2)
where φ is a matrix of weights of the linear relations between variables, r is a deterministic trend vector, c
is the vector of constant intercepts, and  is a vector of uncorrelated errors. While more advanced models
can be considered, including longer lags and non-linear terms, we choose the VAR model of lag 1 for its
general character and its proved power to reveal patterns in finance [23, 16]. More complex models might
have higher power to reveal nuance patterns, but at the expense of a loss of generality due to the focus
on particular systems.
We include all the time series in a single model to avoid the false positives associated with pairwise
Granger tests. To ensure the correct application of the VAR model, we need to verify that our analysis is
consistent with its fundamental assumptions: i) that the elements of V (t) do not have a unit root, and ii)



                                                              4/19
                                          David Garcia, Frank Schweitzer:
     Royal Society Open Science 2:150288 (2015) http://rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/2/9/150288




that the error term  has no temporal nor structural correlations. We verify the first set of assumptions
on the properties of V (t) by applying a set of tests and transformations prior to the application of the
VAR model. We ensure that our conclusions are robust to the second set of assumptions by correcting
for correlations in the noise term, as explained in the Materials and methods section.


Impulse analysis. The VAR weights φ are only informative when there are no correlations in the
error term  of equation 2, which is usually not the case in practice. To extract stylized facts that can be
used in the design of trading strategies, we perform an impulse analysis by measuring Impulse Response
Functions (IRF) [38] while correcting for correlations in the empirical error. This method simulates the
system dynamics when it receives a shock in one of the variables, applying the VAR dynamics of Equation
2 to reproduce the changes in the rest of the variables through time. By recording the changes in each
variable, we can estimate the total size and the timespan of the perturbation produced by the shock.
In essence, the IRF method creates a computational equivalent of the system under scrutiny, to test its
reaction to exogenous impulses in each of its elements.


Trading strategy design and evaluation. The output of the impulse analysis step, shown in Figure
1, is a set of patterns of Granger-type "causation", i.e. it tests the null hypothesis of the absence of
temporal correlations among the variables. We use these patterns as stylized facts that indicate which
variables precede changes in price returns. For example, if variable Y (t) has a significant impact on Ret(t)
in the impulse analysis, we will include Y (t) in our trading strategy design with sign sY , which takes the
value 1 if the response of Ret(t) to Y (t) was positive, and −1 otherwise. Thus, a predictor based on Y (t)
would be
                             sign(Ret(t + 1)) = sign(sY ∗ (Y (t) − Y (t − 1)))                            (3)
This way, we predict increases (decreases) in price between time t and t + 1 if signals with positive
responses increase (decrease) between time t − 1 and t, and vice versa for signals with negative responses.
Since our multidimensional analysis is robust to confounds between multiple time series, the findings of
impulse analysis can be integrated in a Combined strategy based on a voting mechanism. The Combined
strategy applies the other predictors and formulates a prediction corresponding to the sign of the sum of
their outputs, i.e. the majority vote.
We evaluate the profitability of the designed strategies in comparison to the benchmark of standard
strategies, based on the backtesting over the leave-out sample as indicated in Figure 1. For each strategy,
we make a data-driven simulation of a trader following that strategy, and we record the profits of that
trader on a daily basis. Details on the computational simulation of financial traders can be found in the
Materials and methods section.


Bitcoin social economic and signals We apply our approach to the case of trading Bitcoin based
on social and economic signals of the Bitcoin ecosystem. We set up a system that monitors different data
sources, retrieving data in real time in combination with historical time series. The data volumes recorded
during our study period of almost four years is shown in Figure 2, and can be interactively browsed in
our online visualization1 . The signals we measure, explained more in detail in the Materials and methods


  1 www.sg.ethz.ch/btc



                                                    5/19
                                                             David Garcia, Frank Schweitzer:
                        Royal Society Open Science 2:150288 (2015) http://rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/2/9/150288




section include economic signals of price P (t) and returns Ret(t), trading volume in a wide range of
Bitcoin exchange markets F XV ol (t). Furthermore, we measure the economic signal of transaction volume
in the Block Chain BCT ra (t), which measures the volume of usage of Bitcoin as a currency, and the
amount of downloads of the most important Bitcoin client Dwn(t) as a measure of growth in adoption of
the Bitcoin technology. The social signals we measure are the level of search volume in Google for the term
"bitcoin" S(t), the word-of-mouth level as measured by the amount of tweets containing Bitcoin-related
terms TN (t), and the emotional valence TV al (t) and opinion polarization TP ol (t) expressed in those tweets
using lexicon-based approaches from psycholinguistics [39, 40] (more details in Materials and methods).
All these signals are shown in Figure 2, illustrating the large oscillations of price and other signals related
to Bitcoin.




                                                                                                                                                                                 BC Transactions [x1000]
                                                                                                                                                                                100
               50                                                                                                               leave−out




                                                                                                                                                         FX Volume [BTCx1000]
                                        1000
                                                         Price (BPI)




Downloads [x1000]
                                                                                                                                  period             1200




                        Price [USD/BTC]
                                                         Exchange Volume                                                                                                        80
                                        750
                                                         SourceForge Downloads
                                                         Block Chain Transactions                                                                    800
                                                                                                                                                                                60
               25
                                        500
                                                                                                                                                                                40
                                                                                                                                                     400
                                        250                                                                                                                                     20

               0                        0                                                                                                            0                          0
                                               02/2011   07/2011     01/2012        07/2012      01/2013    07/2013   01/2014        07/2014   12/2014
              1                                                                                                                                                                 0.5
                                                         Number of Tweets           Valence (weekly)




Google search volume   Tweets Number [x1000]
                                        120                                                                                                          6.0
                                                         Search Volume              Polarization (weekly)
                                                                                                                                                                                0.4




                                                                                                                                                         Valence                    Polarization
                                        80                                                                                                           5.8
                                                                                                                                                                                0.3
              0.5
                                                                                                                                                     5.6
                                        40                                                                                                                                      0.2

                                                                                                                                                     5.4                        0.1
              0                         0
                                               02/2011   07/2011     01/2012        07/2012      01/2013    07/2013   01/2014        07/2014   12/2014
                                                                                                 Date

Figure 2: Time series of data volumes in the Bitcoin ecosystem. Interactive version:
www.sg.ethz.ch/btc



3                         Results

3.1                                  Data-driven Bitcoin trading strategy design

For our statistical analysis, we include all the data up to January 1st, 2014, covering almost 3 years.
After applying stationarity tests, we conclude that the time series of price returns Ret(t) can be assumed
to be stationary, as well as the first differences of the other seven signals (details on the stationarity test
results can be browsed in www.sg.ethz.ch/btc and in the SI). As a consequence, we define our variable




                                                                                                  6/19
                                                           David Garcia, Frank Schweitzer:
                      Royal Society Open Science 2:150288 (2015) http://rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/2/9/150288




                                                                                                                                                 Polarization to Valence
                                                                                                                           B
    Response of Return [%]
                                               Return to Polarization
                             A                                                                                                                   Polarization to Return




                                                                         Response [sd]
                                               Return to FX Volume
                                                                                                             0.10


                                                                                                             0.00


    −0.2  0.2     0.6
                                                                                                             −0.15
                             0   1   2     3     4     5      6     7                                                      0     1         2     3        4      5      6       7




                                                                         Cumulative response of Return [%]
                                                                                                                               Downloads       BC Transactions       Tweets Number




                                                                                                             0.2 0.4 0.6
                                                                                                                               Search          FX Volume             Valence
                                         FX Volume to Valence




Response [sd]
                                                                                                                                                                     Polarization

                                         FX Volume to Polarization
            0.05



            −0.05                                                 C                                          −0.2                                                             D
                             0   1   2     3     4     5     6      7                                                      0     1         2     3        4      5      6       7
                                         t [days]                                                                                               t [days]


   Figure 3: Results of Impulse Response Function analysis. (A) Impulse Response Functions of
   return to shocks in Twitter polarization and exchange volume, (B) of Twitter polarization to shocks in
   return and Twitter valence, and (C) of exchange volume to shocks in Twitter valence and polarization
   (right). Solid lines show responses, dashed lines show 95% confidence intervals. (D) Cumulative Impulse
   Response Functions of price return to changes in the other signals. Dashed lines indicate responses below
   the 0.1% level.

   vector as:
                                          V (t) = [Ret(t), ∆F XV ol (t), ∆BCT ra (t), ∆Dwn(t),
                                                           ∆S(t), ∆TN (t), ∆TV al (t), ∆TP ol (t)]
   composing the input to the multivariate analysis of our framework. We fit a VAR as explained in Materials
   and methods over the analysis period. We compute IRF for all pairs of variables, all results including
   VAR estimates and IRF values can be browsed in www.sg.ethz.ch/btc and in the SI. Here, we comment
   on the most relevant results, which serve as input for our trading strategy design.
   Figure 3 A shows the IRF of returns to shocks in polarization and volume in exchange markets, where
   the response is measured in return percentages. Both polarization and exchange volume have significantly
   positive influences in price returns one day after the shock, decreasing rapidly afterwards. The increase of
   returns with polarization is consistent with the hypothesis that disagreement fuels trading in speculative
   scenarios [30, 31], where information asymmetries fuel price bubbles. Exchange volume also increases with
   polarization, as shown in Figure 3 C, but the the relationship is instantaneous rather than lagged as in
   the case of returns.



                                                                        7/19
                                           David Garcia, Frank Schweitzer:
      Royal Society Open Science 2:150288 (2015) http://rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/2/9/150288




Figure 3 B shows the response of polarization in Twitter to shocks in returns and valence. The negative
effect of polarization shows that price drops lead to increases in polarization, signaling the disagreement
in the Bitcoin community due to price crashes. The pattern linking valence to polarization is relevant,
revealing that periods with increasing positivity in expression precede stages of higher polarization. The
role of valence can further be observed in the IRF of exchange volumes in Figure 3 C, in which valence has
a significant effect. The combination of patterns of increasing polarization and exchange volume following
stages of increasing valence show the relevance of valence in price returns, in addition to the effects of
polarization and exchange volume.
We further validated these results in two ways. First, we fit a VAR with lags longer than a day, selecting
the optimal lag that optimizes the Bayesian Information Criterion. We found that a lag of 2 is optimal,
but the results of the fits and IRF analysis did not qualitatively change (see SI). Second, we performed a
Monte Carlo test, computing the impulse response functions for time series with randomized permutations
of the values. The results of these permutation tests show are consistent with the above results, as reported
in the SI, showing the robustness of our approach.


Turning analysis into strategy We summarize the above findings as stylized facts that can drive the
decisions of an algorithmic trader. We focus closer on the role of each signal into returns, by computing
the cumulative changes given by the IRF analysis. This way, we can identify which signals show a sizable
pattern that precedes changes in returns, and filter out those that are not significant or can be explained
as confounds of the others. Figure 3 D shows the results, measuring the cumulative change in return
percentage when each one of the other signals receives a shock of size one standard deviation. The
three signals with effects above the 0.1% level are polarization, valence, and exchange volume, reaching
effects up to 0.5% in one day that prevail through time. Note that this is a relatively large value, because
trading results in multiplicative returns. Such effect sizes have strong potential impact on the profitability
of trading strategies over long time periods. This allows us to discard the rest of the signals, feeding
into our trading strategy design by producing four strategies: three strategies of positive sign, Valence,
Polarization, and FXVolume, and a fourth Combined strategy determined by a voting mechanism as
explained in the Trading strategy framework section.


3.2    Bitcoin strategy evaluation

To evaluate the profitability of our four strategies, we set up a benchmark against random strategies
and technical strategies, using the actual exchange rate of BTC for USD in bitfinex.com as well as the
Bitcoin Price Index (see www.sg.ethz.ch/btc for results with BPI). Random strategies sample a random
number with 0 mean at every time t, and formulate a prediction based on the sign of the random number.
Among technical strategies, the simplest is Buy and Hold, which simply buys BTC with the initial capital
at time t = 1, selling it only once at the time when profits are evaluated. The technical strategies we use
are a benchmark of simple standard predictions [5]: i) the Momentum strategy, which predicts that price
changes at time t + 1 will be the same as at time t, ii) the Up and Down Persistency strategy UPD, which
predicts that price increases at time t are followed by decreases at time t + 1, and vice versa, and iii) the
Relative Strength Index strategy RSI, which computes an additional time series of ratios of return sign




                                                     8/19
                                                         David Garcia, Frank Schweitzer:
                    Royal Society Open Science 2:150288 (2015) http://rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/2/9/150288




                             Combined                                                                                      250
             200             Valence
                             Polarization



Profit [%]
                                                                                                                     Profit [%]
                             FXVolume
             100             Random

                                                                                                                      50      150
                                                                                                                           0
             −50

                                                                                                                           −100
                2014−01−01          2014−03−01         2014−05−01    2014−07−01    2014−09−01   2014−11−01   2015−01−01         0.000 0.005 0.010 0.015 0.020

             100             Momentum            RSI                                                                       100
                             Buy and Hold        UPD
             50



Profit [%]
                                                                                                                     Profit [%]

                                                                                                                       0       50
             0


             −50                                                                                                           −50


             −100                                                                                                          −100
                                                                                                                                    0.000 0.005 0.010 0.015 0.020
               2014−01−01           2014−03−01         2014−05−01    2014−07−01    2014−09−01   2014−11−01   2015−01−01
                                                                        Date                                                                  P(Profit)

  Figure 4: Profits of trading strategies. Left: Time series of profit for our strategies (top), and technical
  strategies (bottom). Shaded areas show one standard deviation of the random strategy. Interactive version:
  www.sg.ethz.ch/btc Right: Kernel density plots of the profit of each strategy (bandwidth=15%).


  frequencies over a rolling window of five days, and predicts price changes based on reversals of this time
  series (more details in [5]).
  The simulation of each strategy produces a time series of profits

                                                                                  C(t) − C(0)
                                                                    Profit(t) =               ∗ 100                                                           (4)
                                                                                     C(0)

  where C(t) is the capital of the trader at time t and C(0) is the initial investment capital. Figure 4 shows
  the time series of profits for our four strategies and the technical strategies. In addition, we compute
  the profit of Buy and Hold, and the results of the simulation of 10000 random traders. The Valence,
  Polarization and Combined strategies clearly perform better than a random trader, while the FXVolume
  is not very far from the result of random traders. Among the technical strategies, only RSI and Momentum
  are able to eventually reach beyond the outcome of random traders, but are still clearly outperformed by
  the Polarization and Combined strategies.
  The stopping time of the simulation of a trading strategy is given by our data, but a variety of factors
  might trigger a trader to stop trading earlier in a real scenario [3]. For that reason, we explore the
  distribution of profits of each strategy, assuming that the trading stops at any arbitrary point of our
  backtesting period. Thus, for each strategy we have a set of profit values, one for each possible trading
  end date. The right panel of Figure 4 shows the Kernel Density Plots of the distributions of profits for each
  strategy. It can be appreciated that the most profitable strategy is Combined, followed by Polarization
  and then Valence and RSI. We quantitatively assessed this result, through Wilcoxon tests [41] over the
  distributions of profits (more details in SI), confirming the observation that the most profitable strategies
  are Combined, and Polarization. More precisely, the Combined strategy gives profits beyond 100% for
  most of the time during the trading period.



                                                                                  9/19
                                           David Garcia, Frank Schweitzer:
      Royal Society Open Science 2:150288 (2015) http://rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/2/9/150288




While surveying cumulative returns is illustrative of the performance of the strategies, the multiplicative
nature of cumulative returns overweights early positions and is biased towards the beginning of the
evaluation period. To properly evaluate trading strategies, we calculated the Sharpe Ratio [42], measuring
                                   µ −R
risk-corrected profits as: SR = RσR f , where µR and σR are the mean and standard deviation of the
daily rate of return of a strategy R(t) = (C(t) − C(t − 1))/C(t − 1). Rf is the "risk- free" return rate of
a theoretical investment that would give certain profit under no risk at all, which is often estimated as
the interest rate of high-quality sovereign bonds. At the time of writing, some European sovereign bonds
are giving interest rates close to zero or even negative [43], which motivates our conservative choice of
Rf = 0. The value of SR is calculated in annualized units, taking into account that Bitcoin can be traded
365 days a year.

                        Combined      Polarization    Valence    FXVolume       Buy and hold
                 SR        1.7653           1.0120     0.6410       0.5738           -0.7741
                 µR        0.3229           0.1779     0.1183       0.1082           -0.1635
                       Momentum              UPD          RSI        DJIA           Random
                 SR        0.9146          -0.8990    -0.1772       0.7995           -1.6590
                 µR        0.1625          -0.1736    -0.0346       0.0345           -0.0963

                       Table 1: Sharpe Ratios and mean daily returns of strategies.

Table 1 reports the Sharpe Ratio SR and the mean daily return µR for all strategies, as well as for the
DJIA and the average of 10000 random traders. The Sharpe Ratio analysis is consistent with the results
of the cumulative returns analysis, showing that the Combined strategy provides the highest returns,
with the best SR value above 1.75 and with daily returns above 0.3 % per day. The profitability of these
strategies illustrate how social media sentiment can produce positive returns on investment, especially
when including polarization measures beyond the trivial quantification of valence or mood.


3.3    Costs and risks of the Combined strategy

To understand better the possible weaknesses of the Combined strategy, we run a series of tests to evaluate
the role of trading costs and additional risks. Trading Bitcoin in an online market usually comes at a cost,
which often depends on the activity and the traded capital. These trading costs should not be confused
with the transaction fees in the Block Chain [9], which do not depend on the transacted cost and are
not associated to any market of exchange to other currencies. Trading costs can potentially erode the
profitability of trading strategies, especially if they require many movements. We simulated the same
backtests for costs increasing from 0 to 0.3% of the exchanged capital, a value well above the maximum
costs of major trading platforms [44]. As a simplification, we assume that buying, selling, and borrowing
costs are the same, yet their values might depend on the trading volume of a strategy [44]. Figure 5 shows
the final profits of the Combined strategy, which decrease monotonically with trading costs. The strategy
is still highly profitable for low costs, but for costs above 0.25%, the strategy is not profitable any more.
Furthermore, we repeat this analysis assuming the limitation that daily positions need to be forcefully
closed at the end of each trading period (shown in SI), finding a decrease in returns but that the strategy
is still profitable for trading costs of 0.1%, a typically high cost of current exchange platforms [45].



                                                     10/19
                                          David Garcia, Frank Schweitzer:
     Royal Society Open Science 2:150288 (2015) http://rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/2/9/150288




                                         100 150

                            Profit [%]   50

                                         0


                                                   0.00   0.05   0.10   0.15   0.20   0.25   0.30

                                                                 Trading cost [%]

              Figure 5: Final profit of the Combined strategy versus trading cost.


In this application, the leave-out period is characterized by decreasing BTC prices. Thus, it is important
to evaluate the role of each possible trading action: longing when BTC are bought to be sold later,
and shorting when they are borrowed and traded as explained above. We repeat the backtesting of the
Combined strategy allowing only short and only long positions, following the methodology of [6]. As
reported more in detail in the SI, the only short strategy yields higher cumulative returns than the only
long strategy, as expected from a period in which prices decrease steadily.
We test further properties of the behavior of the Combined strategy in the leave-out period. The distribu-
tion of daily returns of the Combined strategy during the leave-out period follows a lognormal distribution,
as tested through maximum likelihood fits and Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests (see SI). The time series of
returns of this strategy is also not autocorrelated and can be considered stationary (see SI for stationarity
tests of daily returns). This additional analysis shows that the high profitability of the Combined strategy
is not due to risky correlations in the behavior of the trading strategy.


4    Concluding remarks
Our work applies established methods of time series analysis and computational finance to integrate the
analysis, design, and evaluation of trading strategies and social and economic signals. We have shown
that our approach successfully reveals temporal patterns in the Bitcoin ecosystem, in particular the
relation between price returns and the signals of exchange volume and Twitter valence and polarization.
Our statistical analysis is robust to noise correlations and the finite nature of time series, providing
a consistent set of results that we can apply to strategy design. We evaluated the profitability of our
strategies through data-driven simulations of a computational model of a trader, showing that a strategy
that combines valence, polarization, and exchange volume can reach very high profits in less than a year.
The added value of including polarization in our analysis constitutes evidence that collective factors
of emotions and opinions have the potential to predict financial returns, beyond trivial macroscopic
aggregates like average valence.




                                                                  11/19
                                          David Garcia, Frank Schweitzer:
     Royal Society Open Science 2:150288 (2015) http://rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/2/9/150288




Our framework can be applied to other trading scenarios in which social signals are available, like in the
case of company stock trading driven by sales data, news information, and social media sentiment towards
a company. The general nature of our methods are of special relevance for real trading scenarios, as the
stylized facts we use to design strategies provide a tractable explanation for their mechanisms. This allows
traders to understand and evaluate the principles of the algorithmic trading strategies designed in our
framework. Such tractability is an advantage in comparison to more complex, non-linear, or subsymbolic
models that do not have straightforward interpretations. Nevertheless, improvements can be expected
from the addition of longer time lags, higher frequency trading, and real-time optimization approaches.
Furthermore, the rules that drive our trading strategies do not require retraining or calibration during
trading, and the social and economic signals we employ can be quantified during a day in order to have
an instant trading decision ready at the beginning of the next day. Our application to Bitcoin trading
is thus realistic, making use of shorting options and performing well under the typical trading costs of
Bitcoin markets [44].
The application of our results should be taken with caution. Historical profit through backtesting do
not necessarily predict future ones, and the information sources analyzed here could be adopted by
Bitcoin traders. Our evaluation goes as far as the representativity of the leave-out sample, and future
research should evaluate the performance of our approach when prices rise and when traders are aware
of the existence of our trading strategies. Financial markets are known to quickly absorb knowledge, as
it happened with the inclusion of search trends data in stock trading [7]. It is also difficult to estimate
the scalability of automatic trading strategies, as financial markets are complex adaptive systems that
react to trades of large volume. Furthermore, systemic risk emerges from algorithmic trading, creating
flash crashes due to algorithmic resonance [8]. In addition, structural changes and additional risks in
borrowing and lending Bitcoin for shorting can emerge when exchange markets close or governments
regulate Bitcoin, changing the rules of the game in a way such that our trading strategies might not work
any more.
With our study, we have shown that it is possible to turn social signals into profit. This extends the range
of typical business applications for social media data like viral marketing or user engagement. Specifically,
our combination of statistical analysis and backtesting serves as a framework for future applications of
social media data in algorithmic trading. It allows a robust validation of strategy profits and a clear
understanding of the system dynamics behind these profits. The application of our framework to Bitcoin
trading illustrates that (asymmetric) information and profit are two manifestations of the same thing,
and how traders can apply these macroscopic information sources to derive large profits. We foresee that
the applications of social signals to finance will reach far beyond Bitcoin, not only to make private profit
but also to understand the dynamics of individual and collective decisions and emotions.


5    Materials and methods
Stationarity tests. Before fitting the VAR model, we test the stationarity of each time series through
two alternative tests: i) the Augmented Dickey Fuller (ADF) test [46], which has the null hypothesis that
the tested time series is non-stationary, and ii) the Kwiatkowski-Phillips-Schmidt-Shin (KPSS) test [47],
with the null hypothesis that the time series is stationary. Under these two tests, it can be considered



                                                   12/19
                                          David Garcia, Frank Schweitzer:
     Royal Society Open Science 2:150288 (2015) http://rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/2/9/150288




safe that a time series is stationary if it passes the ADF test with a p-value below 0.05 and does not
pass the KPSS test, giving a p-value above 0.1 [38, 16]. We first analyze the time series of levels of each
signal X(t), applying the differentiation operator ∆X(t) = X(t) − X(t − 1) until each time series is
stationary. This step is inspired in the Box-Jenkins method of ARIMA time series analysis [48], and it
is usual to reach stationarity after first differences [38, 16]. The stationary properties of these time series
imply that their means and standard deviations are bound, allowing us to renormalize them through the
Z-transformation Z(t) = (X(t) − µX )/σX , where µX and σX are the mean and standard deviation of
each time series. This way, all time series have the same scale and variance, and their effects in statistical
analysis can be compared.


Impulse response function analysis. In the impulse analysis, we correct for the correlations in  in
two ways. First, we apply orthogonalized impulses of unit covariance, creating a shock of one standard
deviation in a variable under the error correlations of the VAR [49]. Second, we apply bootstrapping on
the resulting responses by producing surrogate time series from resampling the residuals [38]. This way,
we numerically compute confidence intervals of the responses in a very strict way, avoiding false positives
and taking into account the finite size of the analysis period. In our case, we create 10, 000 bootstrap
samples to estimate 95% confidence intervals of the responses. As a result, we simultaneously measure
the dynamics of the system and test their statistical significance.


Trading based on predictions. During each timestep, the prediction function makes a forecast either
based on Equation 3, or based on the price time series for technical strategies. Positive predictions
translate into buy decisions when the trader does not own the asset, and hold if it does. When the
predictor takes value 0, no change is done and the previous position is imitated. Negative predictions
translate into sell positions when the trader owns the asset or short when it does not own it. Shorting
works as follows: Traders can make profit from correct predictions of price drops even if they do not
own the asset predicted to drop in price. This is implemented by borrowing the asset, selling it first and
buying it later for a lower price. The limitation for borrowing is usually imposed on the amount of capital
already held by the trader, and often incurs in additional trading costs and legal regulations [50]. The
simulation of each strategy produces a time series of profits, allowing us to measure their profitability
based on historical data.
Buy and sell orders have respective costs cb and cs , which are proportional to the total traded capital.
In our case we assume all costs are equal c = cb = cs , leaving particular realizations of the costs as open
for future research. We compute daily cumulative returns when trading stops at t+1, holding USD or
selling BTC at the price of t+1. Our trading simulations have a limit on short selling set by the amount of
capital held by the trader and assume that short selling needs to be instantly executed, i.e. short positions
are limited to one iteration. In summary, the strategy we execute is a single-asset backtesting scenario in
which 100% of the capital is invested at each time step and shorting is limited. The pseudocode of this
simulation is shown in Algorithm 1.


Economic signals from financial data The establishment and bankruptcy of various Bitcoin ex-
change markets motivated the creation of the Bitcoin Price Index (BPI) [51]. The BPI combines a set of
price indices from well-performing exchange marketplaces to provide a reference for BTC/USD exchange



                                                    13/19
                                          David Garcia, Frank Schweitzer:
     Royal Society Open Science 2:150288 (2015) http://rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/2/9/150288




nUSD = 1; CR[1]=1;
for each t from 1 to T-1 do
   if prediction(X,t) == 1 and nBTC == 0 then
       nBTC = nUSD * (1-cb ) / P[t] ;
       nUSD = 0
   else if prediction(X,t) == -1 and nBTC > 0 then
       nUSD= nBTC * (1-cs ) * P[t] ;
       nBTC = 0
   else if prediction(X,t) == -1 and nBTC == 0 then
       nBTCb = nUSD / P[t] ;
       nUSD = nUSD + nBTCb * (1-cs ) * P[t] - nBTCb * P[t+1] / (1-cb )
   CR[t+1] = nUSD + nBTC * P[t+1] *(1-cs );
end
                           Algorithm 1: Algorithm of trading simulation.


rates, and is accepted as a standard measure of Bitcoin price in economics [52, 53, 18]. We use the daily
closing prices of each day t at 23:59 GMT from coindesk.com, composing the time series of price P (t)
from February 1st, 2011 to December 31th, 2014, shown in the top panel of Figure 2. The BPI is not nec-
essarily tradeable, and for that reason we evaluate our trading strategies with the actual exchange rate of
BTC for USD in bitfinex.com, one of the largest markets reported in coindesk.com. We also retrieved
the daily volume of BTC exchanged in 80 online markets for other currencies from bitcoincharts.com.
Aggregating all these data sources, we compose an Internet-wide measurement of Foreign eXchange (FX)
volume of BTC traded every day F XV ol (t), including more than 152 Million BTC in exchange trades as
we recorded in early 2015.
Every purchase of products and services in BTC leaves a trace in the Block Chain, the distributed ledger
that records all transactions in the Bitcoin network. We construct a time series with the daily amount
of Block Chain transactions BCT ra (t), as measured by blockchain.info every day at 18:15:05 UTC,
which we approximate to 00:00 GMT of the next day. While some data is lost in this additional delay of
few hours, further research can provide more precise measurements up to the minute level using the raw
information in the Block Chain itself as in [16]. This way, we include more than 55 million transactions
in the studied period, measuring the overall activity of the system when using Bitcoin as means of
exchange. In addition, we measure the growth of the Bitcoin market through its amount of adopters,
using the operationalization of measuring the amount of downloads of the most popular Bitcoin client2
[16], daily binned in line with other time series. The resulting time series of downloads Dwn(t) is shown
in the top panel of Figure 2.


Social signals We record the overall interest towards Bitcoin through information search, as quantified
by the Google trends volume for the term "bitcoin", S(t), as recorded in early 2015 and shown in the
bottom panel of Figure 2. We choose the search term "bitcoin" instead of the "Bitcon - Currency"
topic, which was introduced as a functionality of Google Trends during our analysis period. While the
topic approach can be more precise for demographics and motive analysis [12], we follow a homogeneous



  2 http://sourceforge.net/projects/bitcoin



                                                   14/19
                                          David Garcia, Frank Schweitzer:
     Royal Society Open Science 2:150288 (2015) http://rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/2/9/150288




approach including only the term trend data that was available during the whole study period. It is
important to note that Google Trends data is provided with an additional lag of one day and on the basis
of Pacific Standard Time instead of GMT, adding almost another day of lag. While this is not an issue
for the historical analysis, the evaluation of any trading strategy using S(t) needs to take into account
this additional delay.
We track the attention of social media about Bitcoin in Twitter via the Topsy data service3 . From the
full track of data accessible by Topsy [54], we focus on tweets that contain Bitcoin terms as in previous
research [16], finding a total of 19, 578, 671 Bitcoin-related tweets. The first social signal we extract from
Twitter is the daily amount of unique tweets about Bitcoin TN (t) binned in 24 hour windows starting at
00:00 GMT, measuring the level of word-of-mouth and attention towards Bitcoin and shown in the bottom
panel of Figure 2. We continue by measuring the collective emotional valence with respect to Bitcoin, as
expressed through the text of Bitcoin-related tweets. Valence is considered the most important dimension
of affect, quantifying the degree of pleasure or displeasure of an emotional experience [55]. The expression
of valence through text is a common practice in psychological research, in which lexicon techniques are
used to empirically measure emotions [56, 57]. We measure the average daily valence of Bitcoin-related
tweets through a state-of-the-art lexicon technique [40], which improves the previous ANEW lexicon
method [56] with more than 13000 valence-coded words. We compute the daily average Twitter valence
about Bitcoin during day t in two steps: First we measure the frequency of each term in the lexicon
during that day, and second we compute the average valence weighting each word by its frequency. This
measurement matches more than 50 million valence-carrying tokens, and produces the time series of
Twitter valence TV al (t).
Our last social signal is opinion polarization, which builds up on measuring the semantic orientation of
words into positive and negative evaluation terms [58]. We apply the LIWC psycholinguistics lexicon-
based method [39], and expand its lexicon of stems into words by matching them against the most
frequent English words of the Google Books dataset [59]. As a result, we consider 3463 positive and 4061
negative terms that appear as more than 8 million Twitter tokens. We compute the daily polarization of
opinions in Twitter around the Bitcoin topic TP ol (t), calculating the geometric mean of the daily ratios of
positive and negative words per Bitcoin-related tweet. Note that, instead of repeating a measurement of
valence through two different lexica, we quantify polarization as a complementary dimension to emotional
valence. This way, opinion polarization measures the simultaneous coexistence of positive and negative
subjective content, rather than its overall orientation [58, 23].


References
 [1] Lazer, D., Pentland, A. S., Adamic, L., Aral, S., Barabasi, A. L., Brewer, D., Christakis, N., Contrac-
     tor, N., Fowler, J., Gutmann, M. et al., 2009 Life in the network: the coming age of computational
     social science. Science (New York, NY) 323, 721.
 [2] Schweitzer, F. & Vespignani, A., 2012 Editorial. EPJ Data Science 1, 1. ISSN 2193-1127. (doi:
     10.1140/epjds1).


  3 http://topsy.com/




                                                   15/19
                                          David Garcia, Frank Schweitzer:
     Royal Society Open Science 2:150288 (2015) http://rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/2/9/150288




 [3] Treleaven, P., Galas, M. & Lalchand, V., 2013 Algorithmic trading review. Communications of the
     ACM 56, 76–85.

 [4] Park, C.-H. & Irwin, S. H., 2004 The profitability of technical analysis: A review. Technical report,
     University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Department of Agricultural and Consumer Economics.

 [5] Biondo, A. E., Pluchino, A., Rapisarda, A. & Helbing, D., 2013 Are random trading strategies more
     successful than technical ones? PloS one 8, e68344.

 [6] Preis, T., Moat, H. S. & Stanley, H. E., 2013 Quantifying trading behavior in financial markets using
     google trends. Scientific reports 3.

 [7] Curme, C., Preis, T., Stanley, H. E. & Moat, H. S., 2014 Quantifying the semantics of search behavior
     before stock market moves. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111, 11600–11605.

 [8] Cusumano, M. A., 2014 The bitcoin ecosystem. Communications of the ACM 57, 22–24.

 [9] Nakamoto, S., 2008 Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system. Technical report, Bitcoin Foun-
     dation.

[10] Van Alstyne, M., 2014 Why bitcoin has value. Communications of the ACM 57, 30–32.

[11] Christin, N., 2013 Traveling the silk road: A measurement analysis of a large anonymous online
     marketplace. In Proceedings of the 22nd international conference on World Wide Web, pp. 213–224.

[12] Yelowitz, A. & Wilson, M., 2015 Characteristics of bitcoin users: an analysis of google search data.
     Applied Economics Letters 22, 1030–1036.

[13] Bitpay.         Over 44,000 businesses           and    charities    accept    bitcoin    with    bitpay.
     (https://bitpay.com/directory#).

[14] Dell. Dell now accepts bitcoin. (http://dell.to/1uk8ocZ).

[15] Schweitzer, F., Fagiolo, G., Sornette, D., Redondo, F. V., Vespignani, A. & White, D. R., 2009
     Economic networks: The new challenges. Science 325, 422– 425. ISSN 1095-9203. (doi:10.1126/
     science.1173644).

[16] Garcia, D., Tessone, C. J., Mavrodiev, P. & Perony, N., 2014 The digital traces of bubbles: Feedback
     cycles between socio-economic signals in the bitcoin economy. Journal of the Royal Society Interface
     11, 20140623. (doi:10.1098/rsif.2014.0623).

[17] Kristoufek, L., 2013 Bitcoin meets google trends and wikipedia: Quantifying the relationship between
     phenomena of the internet era. Scientific reports 3.

[18] Kristoufek, L., 2015 What are the main drivers of the bitcoin price? evidence from wavelet coherence
     analysis. PLoS ONE 10(4): e0123923 .

[19] Schoen, H., Gayo-Avello, D., Metaxas, P. T., Mustafaraj, E., Strohmaier, M. & Gloor, P., 2013 The
     power of prediction with social media. Internet Research 23, 528–543.




                                                   16/19
                                          David Garcia, Frank Schweitzer:
     Royal Society Open Science 2:150288 (2015) http://rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/2/9/150288




[20] Bordino, I., Battiston, S., Caldarelli, G., Cristelli, M., Ukkonen, A. & Weber, I., 2012 Web search
     queries can predict stock market volumes. PloS one 7, e40014.

[21] Mao, Y., Wei, W., Wang, B. & Liu, B., 2012 Correlating s&p 500 stocks with twitter data. In
     Proceedings of the First ACM International Workshop on Hot Topics on Interdisciplinary Social
     Networks Research, pp. 69–72. ACM.

[22] Gonzalez-Bailon, S., Banchs, R. E. & Kaltenbrunner, A., 2010 Emotional reactions and the pulse
     of public opinion: Measuring the impact of political events on the sentiment of online discussions.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:1009.4019 .

[23] Tumarkin, R. & Whitelaw, R. F., 2001 News or noise? internet postings and stock prices. Financial
     Analysts Journal pp. 41–51.

[24] Saavedra, S., Duch, J. & Uzzi, B., 2011 Tracking traders’ understanding of the market using e-
     communication data. PloS one 6, e26705.

[25] Gilbert, E. & Karahalios, K., 2010 Widespread worry and the stock market. In ICWSM, pp. 59–65.

[26] Bollen, J., Mao, H. & Zeng, X., 2011 Twitter mood predicts the stock market. Journal of Compu-
     tational Science 2, 1–8.

[27] Garcia, D., Abisheva, A., Schweighofer, S., Serdult, U. & Schweitzer, F., 2015 Network polarization
     in online politics participatory media. To appear in Policy and Internet (http://bit.ly/1zGCPOv).

[28] Garcia, D. & Tanase, D., 2013 Measuring cultural dynamics through the eurovision song contest.
     Advances in Complex Systems 16, 33.

[29] Hirshleifer, J., 1977 The theory of speculation under alternative regimes of markets. The Journal of
     Finance 32, 975–999.

[30] Harris, M. & Raviv, A., 1993 Differences of opinion make a horse race. Review of Financial studies
     6, 473–506.

[31] Antweiler, W. & Frank, M. Z., 2004 Is all that talk just noise? the information content of internet
     stock message boards. The Journal of Finance 59, 1259–1294.

[32] Tetlock, P. C., 2007 Giving content to investor sentiment: The role of media in the stock market.
     The Journal of Finance 62, 1139–1168.

[33] De Choudhury, M., Sundaram, H., John, A. & Seligmann, D. D., 2008 Can blog communication
     dynamics be correlated with stock market activity? In Proceedings of the Nineteenth ACM Conference
     on Hypertext and Hypermedia, HT ’08, pp. 55–60. ISBN 978-1-59593-985-2.

[34] Challet, D. & Bel Hadj Ayed, A., 2013 Predicting financial markets with google trends and not so
     random keywords. Predicting Financial Markets with Google Trends and Not so Random Keywords
     (August 14, 2013) .




                                                   17/19
                                          David Garcia, Frank Schweitzer:
     Royal Society Open Science 2:150288 (2015) http://rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/2/9/150288




[35] Ruiz, E. J., Hristidis, V., Castillo, C., Gionis, A. & Jaimes, A., 2012 Correlating financial time series
     with micro-blogging activity. In Proceedings of the Fifth ACM International Conference on Web
     Search and Data Mining, WSDM ’12, pp. 513–522. ISBN 978-1-4503-0747-5. (doi:10.1145/2124295.
     2124358).

[36] Whittle, P., 1953 The analysis of multiple stationary time series. Journal of the Royal Statistical
     Society. Series B (Methodological) 15, pp. 125–139.

[37] Adamic, L., Brunetti, C., Harris, J. & Kirilenko, A., 2009 On the informational properties of trading
     networks. SSRN eLibrary .

[38] Lütkepohl, H., 2007 New introduction to multiple time series analysis. Springer.

[39] Pennebaker, J. W., Chung, C. K., Ireland, M., Gonzales, A. & Booth, R. J., 2007 The development
     and psychometric properties of liwc2007. LIWC.net .

[40] Warriner, A. B., Kuperman, V. & Brysbaert, M., 2013 Norms of valence, arousal, and dominance
     for 13,915 english lemmas. Behavior research methods 45, 1191–1207.

[41] Wilcoxon, F., 1945 Individual comparisons by ranking methods. Biometrics bulletin pp. 80–83.

[42] Sharpe, W. F. & Sharpe, W., 1970 Portfolio theory and capital markets, volume 217. McGraw-Hill
     New York.

[43] Edwards, B., 2014 European bond yields go negative. The Wall Street Journal .

[44] Bitfinex. Features - short. (https://www.bitfinex.com/pages/features).

[45] Bitfinex. Fees schedule. (https://www.bitfinex.com/pages/fees).

[46] Fuller, W. A., 2009 Introduction to statistical time series, volume 428. John Wiley & Sons.

[47] Kwiatkowski, D., Phillips, P. C., Schmidt, P. & Shin, Y., 1992 Testing the null hypothesis of station-
     arity against the alternative of a unit root: How sure are we that economic time series have a unit
     root? Journal of econometrics 54, 159–178.

[48] Anderson, O. D., 1976 Time series analysis and forecasting: the Box-Jenkins approach. Butterworths
     London.

[49] Zeileis, A., 2004 Econometric computing with hc and hac covariance matrix estimators. Journal of
     Statistical Software 11, 1–17.

[50] Chance, D. & Brooks, R., 2015 Introduction to derivatives and risk management. Cengage Learning.

[51] Coindesk. Coindesk launches proprietary bitcoin price index. (http://bit.ly/11dDAAK).

[52] Brito, J., Shadab, H. B. & Castillo, A., 2014 Bitcoin financial regulation: Securities, derivatives,
     prediction markets, & gambling. Derivatives, Prediction Markets, & Gambling (April 10, 2014) .

[53] Shadab, H. B., 2014 Regulating bitcoin and block chain derivatives. SSRN Preprint 2508707 .



                                                   18/19
                                          David Garcia, Frank Schweitzer:
     Royal Society Open Science 2:150288 (2015) http://rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/2/9/150288




[54] Aitken, T., 2013 Topsy: The social search engine allows you to scan every public tweet ever published
     on twitter. CEO World Magazine .

[55] Russell, J. A., 2003 Core affect and the psychological construction of emotion. Psychological review
     110, 145.

[56] Bradley, M. M. & Lang, P. J., 1999 Affective norms for english words (anew): Instruction manual
     and affective ratings. Technical report, The Center for Research in Psychophysiology, University of
     Florida.

[57] Garcia, D. & Schweitzer, F., 2012 Modeling online collective emotions. In Proceedings of the 2012
     Workshop on Data-driven User Behavioral Modelling and Mining from Social Media, DUBMMSM
     ’12, pp. 37–38. (doi:10.1145/2390131.2390147).

[58] Osgood, C. E., 1964 Semantic differential technique in the comparative study of cultures. American
     Anthropologist 66, 171–200.

[59] Lin, Y., Michel, J.-B., Aiden, E. L., Orwant, J., Brockman, W. & Petrov, S., 2012 Syntactic annota-
     tions for the google books ngram corpus. In Proceedings of the ACL 2012 System Demonstrations,
     pp. 169–174.

Acknowledgements: We thank Emre Sarigol for his technical assistance.
Funding: This work was funded by the Swiss National Science Foundation (CR21I1_146499).
Authors’ contributions: DG conceived the research, retrieved data, and performed the analyses. DG
and FS wrote the manuscript.
Competing interests: The authors declare that they have no competing financial interests.
Ethics statement: This research is based on observational data shared publicly. No personal or indi-
vidual information was retrieved, stored, or analyzed.
Data and materials availability: All data used for this article is publicly available through the corre-
sponding Application Programming Interfaces. Processed data and scripts to reproduce these results are
available at https://www.sg.ethz.ch/btc




                                                   19/19
