Liquidity Provision to Leveraged ETFs and
Equity Options Rebalancing Flows
Evidence from End-of-Day Stock Prices ∗
Andrea Barbon †, Heiner Beckmeyer ‡, Andrea Buraschi §, Mathis Moerke ¶
Abstract
Rebalancing of leveraged ETFs and delta-hedging of equity options are two distinct
and economically signiﬁcant sources of order ﬂow and liquidity demands. We show
that they induce signiﬁcant end-of-day momentum and mean-reversion in stock
returns, while the eﬀects dissipate within the next trading day. While gamma ef-
fects are persistent throughout our sample, those stemming from leveraged ETFs
are decreasing signiﬁcantly over time. We argue that these dynamics arise from
diﬀerent intermediation structures, generating heterogeneous levels of information
asymmetry on rebalancing ﬂows. While leveraged ETF providers generate perfectly
predictable ﬂows because of their strict mandate, option delta-hedgers have ﬂexibil-
ity in deciding the strategic timing of their rebalancing, resulting in less predictable
ﬂows. Consistent with this view, we ﬁnd that leveraged ETF ﬂows attract more liq-
uidity provision and that their eﬀect on prices is shorter-lived. Our ﬁndings suggest
that information disclosure is beneﬁcial for market liquidity.
JEL classiﬁcation: G12, G13, G14, G23
Keywords: Liquidity Provision, Gamma Exposure, Option Delta-Hedging, Leveraged
ETF, End-of-Day Momentum
∗We thank Kris Jacobs (discussant), Neil Pearson, Jason Wei (discussant), Dmitriy Muravyev, Ma-
hendrarajah Nimalendran (discussant), Danny Qin (discussant), John J. Shim (discussant), Fabrice Riva
(discussant), Alexander Wagner, and Angelo Ranaldo, as well as participants at the FMA Conference
on Derivatives and Volatility 2021, the 37th International Conference of the French Finance Association,
the EFMA annual meeting 2021, the 5th SAFE Market Microstructure Conference, the NFA annual
meeting 2021, the FMA annual meeting 2021, the 13th annual Hedge Fund Research Conference, the
MFA annual meeting 2022, internal seminars at Goldman Sachs, Bank of America Merrill Lynch, and
Morgan Stanley, and the Brown Bag Seminar of the University of St.Gallen for insightful and construc-
tive comments. This paper has been previously circulated under the title The Role of Leveraged ETFs
and Option Market Imbalances on End-of-Day Price Dynamics. Parts of this paper were written while
Mathis Moerke visited the Kellogg School of Management whose hospitality is gratefully acknowledged.
†Swiss Institute of Banking and Finance, University of St.Gallen. andrea.barbon@unisg.ch.
‡University of M¨ unster. heiner.beckmeyer@wiwi.uni-muenster.de.
§Imperial College. andrea.buraschi@imperial.ac.uk.
¶Swiss Institute of Banking and Finance, University of St.Gallen. mathis.moerke@unisg.ch.
1. Introduction
The role of options markets and leveraged ETFs on the dynamics of the underlying
stock prices has recently received signiﬁcant attention, attracting negative press coverage
for potentially contributing to market volatility during already turbulent times. The
trading activity in options was blamed to increase the violent stock swings during the
February-March 2020 Covid-19 selloﬀ. The Wall Street Journal wrote:
“Investors searching for clues on what drove the back-to-back drops in the stock
market are pointing to the options market as a contributor, saying hedging
activity by traders may have exacerbated the decline.”
Wall Street Journal, Feb. 27, 2020 1
In this paper, we investigate the eﬀects of portfolio rebalancing on the intraday dy-
namics of stock prices at the end of the trading day, arising from two distinct derivative
instruments.
The ﬁrst channel relates to the options market, where market makers and broker/dealers
provide liquidity to clients who want to take positions in stock options. As they have
institutional incentives to avoid directional exposures, they typically delta-hedge their
positions. Since the option delta changes when the value of the underlying changes, mar-
ket makers need to regularly update their positions to maintain delta neutrality. The
direction of the resulting ﬂows depends on their initial gamma imbalance and the price
movement of the underlying asset. Suppose, for instance, that the price of a stock expe-
riences a positive jump, driven by positive unexpected news about future cash ﬂows. If
the aggregate gamma of market makers is initially negative, maintaining delta-neutrality
requires the purchase of additional shares in the underlying stock. On the contrary, a
positive gamma exposure requires selling the underlying asset. Thus, if the aggregate
gamma of market makers is signiﬁcantly negative, delta-hedging can give rise to signiﬁ-
cant net buying, contributing to end-of-day momentum. Symmetrically, if the aggregate
gamma imbalance of market makers were positive, delta-hedging would have a stabilizing
eﬀect in the form of an end-of-day reversal. 2
1https://www.wsj.com/articles/the-invisible-forces-exacerbating-market-swings-
11582804802
2Derivative markets are by construction in zero net demand since for each option there is a buyer
and a seller. Therefore, the overall dollar value of aggregate gamma for each option is zero across all
purchasers and sellers. However, some market participants are likely not involved in delta-hedging –
think of retail investors or mutual funds – because of diﬀerent incentives. This implies that the ﬂows
arising by delta-hedging activity may not be trivial.
1
The second channel relates to leveraged ETFs, that is, synthetic instruments that
rely on total return swaps, and whose notional principal is a multiple of the value of a
referenced index. Diﬀerent from a standard ETF, a price appreciation of the underlying
index has the compounded eﬀect of increasing both the referenced portfolio and the
required notional value of the swap. As a consequence, any price change gives rise to
an imbalance between the required and eﬀective notional amount of the swap. The
swap counterparty has to manage her risk exposure, thus potentially inducing a large
rebalancing of the portfolio of physical assets used to hedge the swap (see Section 2.3).
Cheng and Madhavan (2010) argue that the portfolio rebalancing of leveraged ETFs may
have an impact on intraday prices.
Figure 1 illustrates the rebalancing eﬀects caused by delta-hedgers and leveraged
ETFs towards the end of the trading day. The upper panel shows the intraday return
path for Tesla’s stock on 13 December 2012. At the beginning of the day, the aggregate
gamma was positive and economically signiﬁcant. During the day, Tesla experienced a
negative return equal to−6.62% by 15:30. Based on the information available, the gamma
imbalance implied that delta-hedgers needed to trade an amount equal to 102.11% of the
average dollar trading volume of Tesla shares in the last half-hour. Indeed, a strong price
reversal emerged in the last 30 minutes of the trading day, which is consistent with the
large initial positive gamma imbalance.
An interesting example that relates to the role of leveraged ETFs is provided by the
dynamics of Apple stock on 24 October 2018, see Figure 1 (middle panel). Apple shares
are an important constituent for leveraged ETFs. At the same time, the aggregate gamma
of delta-hedgers was close to zero at the beginning of the trading day. By 15:30, Apple
shares had dropped by −2.24%. As a consequence, leveraged ETF swap counterparties
had to sell large quantities of Apple shares to rebalance their portfolios for an estimated
amount equal to 8 .85% of the average trading volume in Apple shares. Possibly as a
result, the price dropped further by −1.22%.
The timing of option delta-hedging and portfolio rebalancing by leveraged ETFs can
be diﬀerent. Figure 1 (bottom panel) illustrates the potential eﬀect of this heterogeneity
on the price dynamics. On 23 June 2016, the gamma imbalance of delta-hedgers on
Amazon stock options was large and positive. At the market opening, the price dropped
by almost 4%. The implied hedging demand by delta-hedgers required purchasing shares
for approximately 50% of the average dollar volume in the last half trading hour in
Amazon shares. Consistently, the share price started to mean revert at 15:30, albeit not
completely. Leveraged ETF swap counterparties had to rebalance, which caused further
2
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
HP
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.00
LETF
10 11 12 13 14 15 16
0.04
0.03
0.02
LETF HP 0
TSLA
2012-12-13
rpre
rend
HP
LETF
-6.62%
2.08%
-102.11%
-0.01%
AAPL
2018-10-24
rpre
rend
HP
LETF
-2.24%
-1.22%
-0.17%
-8.85%
AMZN
2016-06-23
rpre
rend
HP
LETF
-3.27%
0.07%
-49.96%
-10.65%
Fig. 1. Delta-Hedging and Leveraged ETF Rebalancing Eﬀects
The ﬁgure depicts the eﬀects of delta-hedging and leveraged ETF rebalancing on three days in our
sample for Tesla (TSLA), Apple (AAPL), and Amazon (AMZN) stock, respectively. rpre denotes the
return from the previous day’s close price until 15:30. rend denotes the return from 15:30 to close. Γ HP
is deﬁned in Equation (5) and is the product of rpre and the aggregate gamma imbalance, ΓIB . ΩLETF
is the measure for leveraged ETF rebalancing, deﬁned in Equation (6). Γ HP and ΩLETF are expressed
in relative terms to the average dollar trading volume in the last half hour over the last month.
downward pressure as it emerged shortly before the market closing.
We start our analysis by testing whether the above-described price eﬀects have em-
pirical support. To do so, we build a novel dataset merging data from several options
exchanges, including the identity of all option counterparties, and the portfolio composi-
tion of 72 leveraged ETFs for 24 underlying benchmark ETFs, which represents almost
the whole universe of leveraged ETFs on U.S. equity indexes. After computing the gamma
imbalance of delta-hedgers and the rebalancing demand of leveraged ETFs, we merge with
3
NYSE TAQ data to get intraday prices of equity stocks. To the best of our knowledge,
this is is the most comprehensive dataset covering options and leveraged ETFs – both in
the cross-section and in the time series. Conﬁrming previous ﬁndings from the literature
(Tuzun, 2014; Shim and Todorov, 2021; Baltussen, Da, Lammers, and Martens, 2021; Ni,
Pearson, Poteshman, and White, 2020), we ﬁnd that both sources of mechanical ﬂows
are signiﬁcantly related to stock returns in the last 30 minutes of the trading day. A
standard-deviation increase in Γ depresses end-of-day returns by −113% of the average
return in the last thirty minutes of a trading day, while a standard-deviation increase
in leveraged ETF rebalancing ﬂows increases end-of-day returns by 430% of the average
return in the last half hour. Moreover, the impact of both rebalancing sources is ampliﬁed
when controlling for the magnitude of the other.
These results are robust to a battery of control variables suggested in the literature,
such as the trading volume in the option relative to the equity market (Roll, Schwartz,
and Subrahmanyam, 2010), the put/call ratio (Blau, Nguyen, and Whitby, 2014), implied
volatility, the riskiness of the underlying stock, and the release of fundamental news.
Next, we turn our attention to the institutional diﬀerences between the two chan-
nels and their implications. On the one hand, leveraged ETFs are subject to a strict
mandate, which requires replicating the underlying index returns at the close multiplied
by a leverage factor on a daily basis. This forces leveraged ETF providers to rebalance
only a few minutes before the end of the trading day, with little room for discretion. On
the other hand, option delta-hedgers enjoy some degree of ﬂexibility with regards to the
timing of their rebalancing strategy. Moreover, while leveraged ETF holdings are fully
disclosed and constant over a single trading day, the intraday inventory of delta-hedgers
potentially changes and is not readily available. These diﬀerent sets of rules and incen-
tives may generate a heterogeneous degree of information asymmetry regarding ﬂows for
the two channels.
An important empirical contribution of our analysis, therefore, relates to the conse-
quences of disclosing order ﬂow information. By exploiting the institutional diﬀerences
of the two channels, we shed light on the relationship between order ﬂow disclosure and
market quality. First, do the transparency of leveraged ETFs and the predictability of
their ﬂows lead to enhanced liquidity provision or does it attract predatory trading? How
does this aﬀect the speed of reversal of stock prices after the liquidity shocks? Second,
how do the eﬀects of the two sources of mechanical order ﬂow evolve over time? Do
liquidity providers improve their ability to accommodate shocks over time? And does
such a learning process depend on the availability of information on ﬂows?
4
We begin by investigating how quickly option delta-hedgers actively hedge following
a large price shock in the underlying. If the large movement has occurred early during
the trading day, we ﬁnd that the hedging activity is almost immediate. In contrast, the
rebalancing activity of leveraged ETFs is unrelated to intraday jumps and takes place
almost exclusively at the end-of-day. We note that these results can explain why the
regression coeﬃcient on leveraged ETFs ﬂow is almost four times larger than its options-
based counterpart. Leveraging on a numerical simulation, we show that the wedge may
result from the measurement errors on our proxy for gamma imbalance – arising from
the discretion of the rebalancing strategy of delta-hedgers.
Next, we show that the price eﬀects of both channels are on average fully reversed,
but with heterogeneous speed. While leveraged ETF-induced price pressure evaporates
at the next-day opening, that arising from delta-hedging is signiﬁcantly longer-lived and
requires almost a full trading day to be reversed. We also ﬁnd that for leveraged ETFs
the price impact coeﬃcient is lower for larger ﬂows, while it does not change signiﬁcantly
for gamma-related ﬂows. As in Brøgger (2021), we interpret these ﬁndings as evidence of
enhanced liquidity provision for the more predictable leveraged ETF-based ﬂows.
Finally, we exploit the length of our sample to analyze the time-series evolution and
persistence of the two channels, using rolling-window regressions. The ﬁndings clearly in-
dicate that the magnitude of the price eﬀects stemming from leveraged ETFs is declining
over time, being barely statistically signiﬁcant in the last part of the sample. On the con-
trary, the importance of gamma-induced price eﬀects is persistent throughout the sample
and, if anything, has been increasing over time. The high and increasing fragmentation
of the U.S. options market potentially causes the diﬀerence in the statistical performance
over time, as it hinders market participants from constructing a precise measure of the
true inventory positions of delta-hedgers.
Overall, these results suggest that liquidity providers can better identify shocks coming
from leveraged ETFs, thus incrementally limiting their impact on asset prices over time.
On the contrary, the price eﬀects due to gamma imbalances and delta-hedging of options
exposures persist throughout the sample, suggesting that liquidity provision is impeded
by information asymmetry.
Related Literature
Our work relates to several streams of the literature. The ﬁrst concerns the role of
order ﬂow information disclosure in microstructure dynamics (Madhavan, 2000). A num-
5
ber of theoretical works suggest that transparency is positively associated with market
quality. Forster and George (1992) and Benveniste, Marcus, and Wilhelm (1992) model
the eﬀects of anonymity in ﬁnancial markets and show that spreads and price impact are
lower when dealers are partially informed about the direction of liquidity trades. Admati
and Pﬂeiderer (1991) propose a model of sunshine trading, showing that liquidity traders
who can pre-announce their order ﬂow enjoy better liquidity provision but increase ad-
verse selection costs for others who cannot. Other models, however, argue in favor of
opaqueness. For instance, Madhavan (1995) provides a theoretical setting featuring mar-
ket segmentation where large institutional investors beneﬁt from non-disclosure of their
liquidity trades. The empirical evidence on the subject has not yet settled the issue.
Porter and Weaver (1998) study the eﬀects of increased transparency on the Toronto
Stock Exchange, concluding that spreads widen after an increase in transparency. Gem-
mill (1996), analyzes the consequences of an increase in post-trade transparency on the
London Stock Exchange, ﬁnding no signiﬁcant impact on market liquidity. By exploit-
ing the heterogeneous impact of two sources of mechanical intraday rebalancing, our
results shed new light on the issue, providing evidence that order ﬂow transparency leads
to better liquidity provision. We argue that, as the institutional mandate of leveraged
ETFs forces them to act under full transparency, they collectively enjoy a positive equi-
librium with lower spreads during their rebalancing operations. Conversely, the freedom
of options delta-hedgers to partially control their rebalancing strategy generates a less
desirable equilibrium with higher transaction costs and reduced price eﬃciency.
The second stream studies the feedback eﬀects of options trading on the underly-
ing stock price dynamics. The literature generally distinguishes between two channels
through which options trading may have an impact on the price of the underlying. Hu
(2014) provides evidence that the information found in market makers’ initial delta-
hedges can signiﬁcantly aﬀect the price dynamics of the underlying. 3 However, a non-
informational channel may also be at work: Ni, Pearson, and Poteshman (2005) and
Golez and Jackwerth (2012) document that rebalancing and unwinding of option market
makers’ delta hedges on or very close to expiration drive the prices of individual stocks
and stock index futures towards option strike prices on option expiration dates. Lately,
Ni et al. (2020) analyze the eﬀects of Γ-imbalance on absolute returns and the autocor-
relation of returns, based on theoretical models that predict a negative relation between
3Other studies advocating an informational channel are, among others, Easley, O’Hara, and Srinivas
(1998), Pan and Poteshman (2006), Ni, Pan, and Poteshman (2008), Cremers and Weinbaum (2010),
Roll et al. (2010), Johnson and So (2012), and Ge, Lin, and Pearson (2016).
6
stock volatility and Γ-imbalance.4 Whereas Ni et al. (2020) resort to daily data, Barbon
and Buraschi (2020) concentrate on intraday price dynamics. They ﬁnd that Γ-imbalance
is negatively related to intraday volatility and document that Γ-imbalance can aﬀect the
frequency and magnitude of ﬂash crashes. Baltussen et al. (2021) show that end-of-day
momentum in many futures contracts concentrates on days with negative Γ-exposure of
option market makers. Finally, Chordia, Kurov, Muravyev, and Subrahmanyam (2021)
propose a risk-based channel. The authors show that net buying pressure in index puts
on the International Securities Exchange positively predicts subsequent S&P 500 index
returns and trace the predictability to the purchase of protection when uncertainty is
high.
A diﬀerent, but related stream of the literature studies the eﬀects of the inventory of
option market makers. Gˆ arleanu, Pedersen, and Poteshman (2009) have provided path-
breaking work on how demand pressure aﬀects option prices. A closely related study is
by Fournier and Jacobs (2020). Johnson, Liang, and Liu (2016) investigate the forces
behind the use of S&P 500 index options and conclude that unspanned crash risk drives
much of their demand. Relatedly, Jacobs and Mai (2020) ﬁnd a tight link between prices
and demand in S&P 500 and VIX options. Chen, Joslin, and Ni (2019) infer ﬁnancial
intermediary constraints via deep out-of-the-money index put options. The authors show
that a tightening of intermediary constraints is accompanied by option expensiveness and
broker-dealer deleveraging.
A third stream focuses on the eﬀects of (leveraged) ETF ownership on the constituent
stocks. Ben-David, Franzoni, and Moussawi (2018) show that stocks with higher ETF
ownership exhibit higher volatility, as liquidity shocks caused by short-horizon traders in
the ETF can be transmitted to the underlying stocks by an arbitrage mechanism. Shum,
Hejazi, Haryanto, and Rodier (2016) show that the rebalancing ﬂows of leveraged ETFs
amplify end-of-day volatility in the period from 2006 to 2011.
Another part of the literature studies intraday return patterns. We ﬁnd high-frequency
return continuation in the cross-section of stock returns, consistent with the evidence
provided by Gao, Han, Zhengzi Li, and Zhou (2018) and Baltussen et al. (2021). Both
studies focus on aggregate investment vehicles, such as ETFs and index Futures. Gao
et al. (2018) show that their eﬀects are stronger on days with elevated volatility, which
are typically also accompanied by higher trading volume. In the cross-section of stocks,
we conﬁrm the ﬁnding of Komarov (2017) that stocks performing best in the ﬁrst half
4For a theoretical foundation, see among others Frey and Stremme (1997), Frey (1998), Sircar and
Papanicolaou (1998), Platen and Schweizer (1998), Wilmott and Sch¨ onbucher (2000).
7
of the day will likely lose in the second half if controlled for market returns. Another
study on short-term return reversals is Heston, Korajczyk, and Sadka (2010). The authors
show that the returns of a half-hour period have predictive power over the same half-hour
periods for up to 40 days in the future when controlling for the impact of the market. They
relate this to the usage of trade mechanisms by institutional traders, designed to limit the
relative price impact of their orders. More recently, studies link investor heterogeneity on
the stock level to cross-sectional intraday and overnight return variations. Lou, Polk, and
Skouras (2019) hypothesize that diﬀerent investor types trade predominately at diﬀerent
times throughout the trading day. Empirically, the authors document high persistence in
overnight and intraday return components, which they ﬁnd not on a single-stock basis,
but also for 14 equity strategies such as size, value or proﬁtability. Bogousslavsky (2020)
focuses only on intraday returns and ﬁnds that a mispricing factor earns positive returns
up to the last half hour, consistent with the idea that arbitrageurs trading on mispricing
reduce their positions at the end of the trading day.
Finally, the last stream focuses on the U.S. equity market closing auction. Bogous-
slavsky and Muravyev (2020) show that the share of daily volume in the closing auction
has more than doubled from 2010 to 2018. They attribute the increase in trading vol-
ume to the rise of indexing and ETFs. Wu and Jegadeesh (2020) examine the price
impact, including ts temporary component, of closing auctions. Trading strategies based
on market-on-close imbalances generate outsized returns.
2. Data and Measurements
To conduct our empirical analysis we source data from several databases, including
information for single stocks, single-name options, and leveraged ETFs. By merging these
data sources we obtain a unique dataset allowing us to measure ﬂows coming from the
hedging of options and rebalancing of leveraged ETFs to study their potential impact on
stock prices.
2.1. Data Sources
Options Market. The ﬁrst dataset merges option data from ﬁve diﬀerent exchanges:
(a) the CBOE C1 exchange, (b) NASDAQ GEMX (GEMX), (c) NASDAQ International
Security Exchange (ISE), (d) NASDAQ Options Market (NOM), and (e) NASDAQ PHLX
(PHLX). The dataset includes information on signed trading volume, the underlying
8
stock, and the category of the counterparties engaged in the trade.
Each of the ﬁve exchanges provides four categories of volume for each option series:
open buy, open sell, close buy, and close sell. Each category is further broken down into
diﬀerent types of market participants: broker/dealer, proprietary, and customer.5 For
each type of market participant, we sum the buy and sell trades to estimate the long and
short open interest at the trader-type level. The ﬁve exchanges sum up to a substantial
proportion of the equity options market, delivering the most comprehensive coverage
available at the moment. Nonetheless, we do not cover volume outside of these exchanges
and OTC options trading. We also gather daily bid and ask quotes, implied volatility,
trading volume, open interest, and Greeks for each option contract from OptionMetrics.
As individual stock options are of American type, OptionMetrics uses binomial trees to
compute implied volatility and Greeks.
Leveraged ETFs. We obtain information on all leveraged ETFs on U.S. equity indexes
from ETFGlobal including the leverage amount, the benchmark index referenced by the
fund and the assets under management of each leveraged ETF at the daily frequency. We
compute the constituents of the benchmark index of each leveraged ETF and use TAQ
data to calculate intraday returns of each selected benchmark referenced by the leveraged
ETF.
Table OA3.1 in the Online Appendix provides an overview of the properties of lever-
aged ETFs included in our sample. On average, we consider 72 leveraged ETFs for 24
underlying benchmark indices, with a cross-sectional distribution that is fairly stable over
time. On average, 45% of the funds we consider are inverse or bear funds. Weighted by
the AUM (VW), this number drops to 33%, but ﬂuctuates substantially over time, with
a proportion of just 16% at the 10th percentile and 63% at the 90th. The average fund
is leveraged by an absolute value of 2.35.
Stock Market. Information on individual equity stocks is obtained from the Center for
Research on Security Prices (CRSP) and includes trading volume, shares outstanding,
and closing prices. We restrict our analysis to stocks with CRSP share codes 10 and 11,
and exchange codes 1, 2, 3, 31, 32, and 33. Information on any type of distribution (e.g.
dividends and stock splits) is also obtained from CRSP. We match data from CRSP with
our options data via the matching algorithm provided by WRDS.
High-frequency Data on Underlying Assets. Intraday stock price data and transaction
volumes are obtained from TAQ. We use standard cleaning procedures and match intraday
5In 2009, the type of professional customer has been introduced alongside the customer. We merge
professional customers with customers.
9
trade prices with CRSP to obtain PERMNOs as unique identiﬁers. More details are given
in Online Appendix OA1. Equipped with intraday prices, we calculate intraday returns
relative to the previous day’s closing price. Following standard practice in the literature,
(see Lou et al., 2019), we assume that corporate events that mechanically impact prices,
e.g. dividend payments and stock splits, take place overnight and are realized at the time
of the ﬁrst trade on the target date. If a delisting occurs as reported by CRSP, we assume
that the delisting amount is realized at the respective day’s close.
To summarize, our sample across optionable stocks and leveraged ETFs comprises
1,882,332 stock-day observations from January 2012 through December 2019. 6
2.2. Measuring Gamma Hedging Pressure
Let V (t,S ) denote the value of an option contract and ∆( t,S ) = ∂V (t,S)
∂S be the ﬁrst
derivative of the option price with respect to the underlying, whereas Γ( t,S ) = ∂2V (t,S)
∂S 2
measures the change of ∆( t,S ) for changes in S. When Γ( t,S ) is not zero, ∆( t,S )
changes depending on time to maturity and the level ofS and, consequently, any hedging
position has to be adjusted periodically. If Γ( t,S ) is large in absolute terms, ∆( t,S ) is
very sensitive to movements in the underlying and it implies a large amount of rebalancing
for the market maker to remain delta-neutral.
Since option market makers and broker/dealers have similar hedging incentives, we
classify both as “delta-hedgers”. Consequently, we categorize proprietary and customers
as non-delta-hedgers and refer to them jointly as “end-customers” in the remainder of
the paper.
To obtain the gamma imbalance of delta-hedgers, we proceed as follows. Let OIBuy,I
o,t
be the open interest of investors of type I in long positions in option o at time t, which
is related to daily volume as follows (see Ni et al., 2020):
OIBuy,I
o,t =OIBuy,I
o,t−1 +Volume OpenBuy,I
o,t −Volume CloseSell,I
o,t (1)
OISell,I
o,t =OISell,I
o,t−1 +Volume OpenSell,I
o,t −Volume CloseBuy,I
o,t , (2)
whereVolume OpenBuy,I
o,t andVolume OpenSell,I
o,t denote the volume from investors type I to
open new long and short option positions, and Volume CloseBuy,I
o,t and Volume CloseSell,I
o,t
6To appear in the sample, each stock has to be optionable and included in one or more leveraged
ETFs.
10
refer to volumes with which investors of type I closed existing long and short positions,
respectively.
Second, we calculate the delta-hedgers’ net open interest in option series o at date t’s
close as
netOIo,t =−
[
OIBuy,Customer
o,t −OISell,Customer
o,t +OIBuy,Proprietary
o,t −OISell,Proprietary
o,t
]
,
(3)
where netOIo,t is measured in units of option contracts and OID,I
o,t is the open interest
of direction D (either buy or sell) by market participant type I (either customer or
proprietary) in option series o at the close of date t. The net open interest of market
makers is the opposite of the sum of the remaining market participant types. Assuming
that broker/dealers are also delta-hedgers yields Equation (3).
Let Γo(t,S ) denote the gamma of option series o on stock j at day t and underlying
priceS, expressed in shares of the underlying. 7 To compute the dayt delta-hedger dollar
gamma imbalance in option series o, we take the product of Γo(t,S ) with the stock price
S at 15:30 on the target day and multiply by the contract multiplierMulto ofo (typically
Multo = 100).8
To obtain the aggregated gamma imbalance on an underlying stock j for trading day
t, denoted by ΓIB
j,t , we compute the sum over all options on the underlying:
ΓIB
j,t =
(∑
o
netOIo,t−1× Γo(t− 1,Sclose
j,t−1)×S15:30
j,t ×Multo
)
  
(⋆)
×Sclose
j,t−1
100 × 1
ADVend
j,t−1
. (4)
The term (⋆) in Equation (4) denotes the total dollar gamma imbalance for a given
stock at day t. It is the dollar amount delta-hedgers need to trade in the underlying
for each one-dollar move in the underlying stock price S. By multiplying ( ⋆) by the
underlying price divided by 100, we obtain the dollar gamma imbalance for a one percent
move inS. This facilitates comparison over time and in the cross-section. Finally, we scale
by the average dollar volume in the last half hour of a trading day, ADV end
t−1, computed
over the last month. Thereby, we express the delta-hedgers’ gamma imbalance in a given
stock as a fraction of the typical trading taking place in the last half hour, which allows
7OptionMetrics calculates the gamma of an option as the absolute change in delta given a $1.00
change in the underlying.
8Since we cannot observe intraday variations of the net open interest, we assume that Γ( t,S ) only
changes due to innovations in the stock price. We hence use the observed stock price at 15:30 on day t
to compute the best possible estimate of the amount to be traded by delta-hedgers.
11
us to obtain a timely proxy for the potential price impact of hedging adjustments.
ΓIB
j,t denotes the amount of hedging market makers would have to do for a 1%-move
in the underlying stock j at time t. We combine this measure with information on how
much the underlying has moved before the start of the hedging window. The return from
the close of day t− 1 to the start of the hedging window at 15:30 is denoted as rpre
j,t . The
percentage hedging pressure is thus the interaction between Γ IB
j,t and rpre
j,t :
ΓHP
j,t = 100× ΓIB
j,t×rpre
j,t. (5)
ΓHP is our main variable of interest. It directly captures the amount of hedging required
for delta-hedgers to remain delta-neutral after observing intraday return rpre.
2.3. Measuring Leveraged ETF Rebalancing Pressure
To understand how leveraged ETFs may contribute to intraday price momentum, let
L be the fund’s leverage factor, say −3 for a bear and +3 for a bull fund, and At the
leveraged ETF’s assets under management (AUM). The required notional amount of total
return swaps at dayt isSt =L×At. Hence, if the return on the index at timet+1 isrbench
t+1 ,
thenAt+1 =At×(1+L×rbench
t+1 ). Therefore, the required notional amount of total return
swaps att + 1 becomesSt+1 =L×At+1 =L×At× (1 +L×rbench
t+1 ). However, the actual
exposure of the total return swaps att+1 isEt+1 =St×(1+rbench
t+1 ) =L×At×(1+rbench
t+1 ).
The diﬀerence between the required and the actual notional is the rebalancing amount,
equal toSt+1−Et+1 =L×(L−1)×At×rbench
t+1 . Given that the required hedging multiple
L× (L− 1) is strictly positive for L∈ R\ [0, 1], leveraged ETF swap counterparties
always have to trade in the same direction as the return of the underlying index, which
may induce an end-of-day return momentum eﬀect in the stocks included in the index
referenced by the leveraged ETF. 9 Unlike the gamma imbalance eﬀect, hedging demand
by leveraged ETFs for a given stock is not necessarily proportional to the return of that
speciﬁc stock but, rather, to the return of the underlying index. Therefore, leveraged
ETFs rebalancing may induce return momentum in a stock, even if its return in the ﬁrst
part of the trading day is zero.
To compute the amount of rebalancing aﬀecting an individual stock, let stock j be
9We assume that returns swap providers (or their counterparties) ultimately need to hold a quantity
of the underlying stock proportional to the size of the swap contract. If some of the swaps are based on
other instruments or on correlated assets, this would introduce noise in our proxy and bias our results
toward zero.
12
included in the underlying of a leveraged ETF i with a weight of wi,j,t on day t. If the
swap counterparty starts rebalancing their exposure at 15:30, and rpre
i,t;bench denotes the
return on the benchmark ETF up until that moment, the relative amount of rebalancing
required in stock j is the sum over all leveraged ETFs in which stock j is included in:
ΩLETF
j,t =
∑Ni,t
i=1Li× (Li− 1)×Ai,t−1×wi,j,t−1×rpre
i,t;bench
ADVend
j,t−1
(6)
We scale by the average dollar volume in the last half hour (ADV end
t−1) to compare the
impact of rebalancing with the average amount of trading at the end of the trading day.
2.4. Summary Statistics
In this section, we provide summary statistics for the gamma hedging pressure and
leveraged ETF rebalancing quantity.
20132014201520162017201820192020
0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
LETF
20132014201520162017201820192020
HP
Fig. 2. Time Series Cross-sectional Distribution of ΩLETF and ΓHP
This ﬁgure shows weekly averages of the cross-sectional distribution of the demand pressure from the
rebalancing of leveraged ETFs (Ω LETF ) and Gamma imbalance (Γ HP ). The dark line represents the
cross-sectional median, the dark-colored area the 25th/75th percentile, and the light-colored area the
5th/95th percentile.
Figure 2 shows the cross-sectional distribution of Ω LETF over time and compares it
with the distribution of Γ HP . While both are time-varying, the distribution of Γ HP is
13
wider, with a larger interquartile range, suggesting that on the same day delta-hedgers
can have a large negative gamma imbalance on some stocks and, at the same time, a large
positive gamma imbalance on another stock. Table A1 in the Appendix provides more
granular summary statistics on Γ HP and ΩLETF . Table A1 shows that the aggregate
pressure arising from leveraged ETFs is on average higher than the one from delta-
hedging, but the distribution of absolute Γ HP has a heavy right tail.
Table 1: The Cross-Section of Demand Pressure from Gamma and Leveraged ETF Rebal-
ancing
This table reports the average daily number (N) and percentage (Share) of stocks with a combined re-
balancing amount in the last 30 minutes of the trading day exceeding a certain threshold (ﬁrst column),
as a percentage of the average dollar volume. The fourth column (% Gamma) reports the proportion
of the total demand pressure due to the Gamma imbalance Γ HP relative to the combined rebalancing
amount:|ΓHP|/(|ΓHP| +|ΩLETF|). Additionally, the table reports the average mean (Mean), standard
deviation (Std), and 10%- and 90%-percentile of the share of the combined rebalancing amount condi-
tional on exceeding the speciﬁed level. The sample contains stocks that are optionable and included in
the benchmark index of at least one leveraged ETF. The sample period is from January 2012 – December
2019.
N Share % Gamma Mean Std 10% 90%
1% 601 .7 60 .23% 49 .95% 5 .11 8 .29 1 .30 9 .81
2% 354 .4 35 .48% 55 .76% 7 .68 10 .41 2 .86 13 .67
5% 182 .6 18 .28% 63 .01% 12 .07 13 .72 5 .47 20 .28
10% 69 .5 6 .95% 71 .86% 21 .23 19 .63 10 .83 34 .30
15% 34 .0 3 .41% 76 .47% 30 .50 24 .34 16 .43 48 .97
25% 12 .5 1 .25% 80 .91% 49 .00 31 .88 28 .92 76 .72
50% 3 .4 0 .34% 84 .75% 94 .33 44 .86 72 .69 122 .20
Table 1 documents the economic signiﬁcance of the demand pressure arising from
the rebalancing activity of the leveraged ETFs and the delta hedging activity in the
options market. The second column reports the average number of stocks in the joint
sample for which the combined dollar rebalancing amount due to both channels exceeds
a certain threshold of the average dollar volume in the last 30 minutes of the trading
day (ADVend), depicted in the ﬁrst column. We ﬁnd that, on average, for 69 (12) stocks
the combined rebalancing amount exceeds the 10% (25%) threshold. For these stocks,
the average rebalancing dollar amount is equal to 21 .23% (49.00%) of ADV end. The
cross-sectional dispersion is large and for stocks in the 90th percentile (last column)
the average rebalancing dollar amount exceeds 34 .30% (76.72%) of the total end-of-day
trading volume. The fourth column provides information about the relative importance
14
of each channel. The majority of the rebalancing amount is driven by Γ HP . For the
group exceeding a rebalancing threshold of 10% (25%), 71 .86% (80.91%) of the average
absolute combined rebalancing originates from the hedging activity of option market
makers. Moreover, the share of ΓHP in the combined rebalancing amount is monotonically
increasing in the threshold level, suggesting that the demand pressure from this channel
dominates for large total rebalancing ﬂows.
2.5. Abnormal Order Flow
We deﬁne the abnormal order ﬂow in the last 30 minutes of trading day t for stock j
as
RSVOLend
j,t = SVOLend
j,t /ADVend
j,t−1. (7)
SVOLend
j,t is the diﬀerence between the trading volumes in up- and down-minutes, deﬁned
as
SVOLend
j,t =
∑
m∈ 15:30→Close
VOLj,t,m× 1rj,t,m>0 −
∑
m∈ 15:30→Close
VOLj,t,m× 1rj,t,m<0, (8)
where m denotes the minutes within the hedging window for target day t.10
3. Empirical Results
3.1. Main Results
Consider the case in which ΓIB
j,t for stockj at timet is negative. If delta-hedgers want
to maintain delta-neutrality, they have to sell the underlying stock if it has depreciated
intraday, leading to additional momentum. Instead, for a positive Γ IB
j,t , the delta-hedgers
have to buy the underlying stock, trading against its previous price change, which gives
rise to intraday reversals. Following Equation (6), rebalancing of the swap portfolios
replicating the exposure of leveraged ETFs will always be in the same direction as the
previous movement of the benchmark ETF, potentially leading to momentum for a large
number of stocks. Another important diﬀerence between the two rebalancing sources is
in the cross-section. Since Γ HP can greatly diﬀer across stocks even on the same day t,
the eﬀect is inherently stock-speciﬁc. For Ω LETF in contrast, all stocks that belong to
10We scale by ADVend
t−1 to make the signed volume comparable across stocks and over time.
15
the same benchmark index are exposed to the same price pressure, proportional to their
weighting in the index.
In Table 2, we investigate the impact of the rebalancing activity of delta-hedgers and
leveraged ETF swap counterparties on the order-ﬂow and returns of individual stocks in
the last half hour before the close. To do so, we employ two types of panel regressions:
RSVOLend
j,t =β0rpre
j,t +β1ΓHP
j,t +β2ΩLETF
j,t +FEj +FEt +ϵj,t,
(9)
rend
j,t =β0rpre
j,t +β1ΓHP
j,t +β2ΩLETF
j,t +FEj +FEt +ϵj,t. (10)
including asset (FEj) and date ﬁxed eﬀects (FEt).11 Standard errors are double-clustered
by day and asset, and return observations weighted by the stock’s market capitalization
in the previous month to rule out that our results are driven by microstructure issues in
small stocks.
Table 2: Impact of Delta-Hedging and Leveraged ETF Rebalancing
The table reports the results to regressing the returns in the last half hour of a trading day on returns until
15:30 (rpre), on option hedging pressure ΓHP and leveraged ETF rebalancing quantity ΩLETF following
Equation (9). T-statistics are in parentheses below and are computed using time-and-entity-clustered
standard errors. ***, **, * denotes signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, 10% level. We include entity-ﬁxed eﬀects
in all speciﬁcations and value-weight observations. The sample period is 2012 – December 2019.
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Dependent RSVOL end
t rend
t RSVOLend
t rend
t rend
t
ΓHP
t -9.438** -9.464*** -10.960***
(-2.116) (-4.709) (-5.521)
ΩLETF
t 109.572*** 43.394*** 46.738***
(5.450) (4.797) (5.198)
rpre
t -1.263*** -0.757*** -1.512*** -0.902*** -0.820***
(-5.111) (-6.907) (-5.640) (-8.139) (-7.452)
Observations 1,882,332 1,882,332 1,882,332 1,882,332 1,882,332
R2 (%) 0.141 0.284 0.234 0.325 0.370
Entity FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Time FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
SEs [t;j] [t;j] [t;j] [t;j] [t;j]
11In Appendix C, we add control variablesXj,t to Equation (9) to rule out that neither informational
channels nor risk-based explanations are driving our results.
16
Gamma Hedging Pressure Column (1) shows that ΓHP negatively impacts RSVOLend
t
with a coeﬃcient of −9.44 (t-value:−2.12), which establishes a signiﬁcant link between
the gamma-induced trading activity of delta-hedgers and end-of-day order ﬂow. At the
same time, this additional directed volume has a direct impact on end-of-day returns
(column 2). Speciﬁcally, the slope coeﬃcient of Γ HP is negative and highly signiﬁcant
at−9.46 (t-value: −4.71), suggesting that a negative shock to Γ HP (additional buying
pressure) ampliﬁes end-of-day returns. We furthermore control for the impact of other
momentum-based intraday eﬀects by including the previous return from last day’s close
to the start of the supposed hedging window at 15:30. While the estimated slope coef-
ﬁcient is negative and signiﬁcant, its inclusion does not materially change the estimated
impact of ΓHP on end-of-day returns.
In Online Appendix OA7, we mitigate concerns that investors might trade options
based on past information which is correlated with future intraday returns. Our results
remain quantitatively and qualitatively the same when replacing Γ HP with an estimate
based on older option inventories of delta-hedgers following Ni et al. (2020).
Leveraged ETFs If the rebalancing pressure from leveraged ETFs is suﬃciently large,
we should ﬁnd that it positively relates to end-of-day order ﬂow, as well as returns.
Column (3) shows how a positive shock to Ω LETF clearly leads to additional buying
pressure at the close. The slope coeﬃcient is estimated at 109.57 and is highly signiﬁcant
(t-value: 5.45). The ensuing buying pressure also translates to higher end-of-day returns
with a coeﬃcient of 43.40 (t-value: 4.80), as shown in column (4).
Joint Rebalancing The two rebalancing channels may aﬀect closing stock returns in
diﬀerent ways. In the example reported in the Introduction, for instance, an investor
considering only gamma hedging ﬂows would have predicted positive returns for Amazon
on June 23rd, 2016, given the large and negative magnitude of ΓHP . Had she also known
about the signiﬁcant amount of expected selling from leveraged ETFs, she may have
revised her prediction.
In column (5) of Table 2 we estimate a model accounting for the two channels jointly,
resulting in increases of both coeﬃcients in absolute magnitude to −10.96 for ΓHP and
47.74 for ΩLETF , both of which are signiﬁcant at the 1%-level. A one standard deviation
decrease in ΓHP is associated with a 113% increase in the magnitude of end-of-day returns
relative to the stock-level mean return during that period, while a standard deviation
increase in ΩLETF corresponds to an increase of 430%.
17
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200US-Dollar (in Billions)
Option Delta-Hedging LETF
Fig. 3. Year-by-Year Rebalancing Flows
The ﬁgure shows the estimated overall absolute rebalancing ﬂows from leveraged ETFs and option delta-
hedging for each year in the sample in billion USD.
We ﬁnd that a shock to the buying pressure coming from leveraged ETF rebalancing
ﬂows is estimated to impact end-of-day returns of a target stock two to four times as
much as a similarly-sized shock from option delta-hedgers. But how do the estimated
rebalancing amounts stack up when considered across all stocks in the universe of op-
tionable stocks, which are also included in leveraged ETFs? Figure 3 shows the absolute
year-by-year rebalancing amount in billion USD, summed across the entire cross-section
of stocks in our sample. For each year, the total amount that would have to be traded in
the underlying stocks to assure delta-neutrality exceeds that required by leveraged ETF
counterparties. In fact, in most years the total rebalancing ﬂows from delta-hedgers are
at least twice as large. We ﬁnd that the total trading amount for both rebalancing sources
has increased over time, from approximately 80 billion USD in 2012 for Γ HP to 160 bil-
lion USD in 2019 – a twofold increase. This growth has two reasons: ﬁrst, the general
growth in options trading. Second, the staggered introduction of weekly options on single
equities, which, due to their short lifespan and corresponding large gamma values, have
a large impact on the overall gamma position of delta-hedgers, potentially prompting
larger rebalancing trading. The total amount of rebalancing from leveraged ETFs has
increased even more dramatically, starting at 35 billion USD in 2012 and growing to 85
billion USD in 2019, which mimics the rapid growth of the industry.
Information Quality of Rebalancing Proxies Why do gamma hedging ﬂows have
a seemingly smaller impact on end-of-day order ﬂow and returns, despite being larger
in terms of USD traded? It is well known that noise in the explanatory variable biases
18
regression estimates towards zero, which potentially explains the seemingly smaller one-
to-one impact of gamma rebalancing. In this section, we investigate the role of uncertainty
attached to acquiring the information necessary to determine the amount of rebalancing
ﬂows from option delta-hedgers. As a counterpoint, consider the estimation of the re-
balancing pressure from leveraged ETFs in Equation (6). To quantify Ω LETF we need
to know the leverage factor, the assets-under-management, the return on the benchmark
ETF before hedging begins, and the weight of the target stock in the benchmark ETF.
All of these inputs are readily observable. Furthermore, leveraged ETFs are mandated to
provide a daily multiple exposure to the benchmark, forcing their swap counterparties to
trade near the market close. Consequently, all necessary information to determine their
rebalancing activity is observed with little uncertainty.
In contrast, the information used to quantify the total amount of rebalancing from
delta-hedgers is more uncertain for a number of reasons: ﬁrst, we only observe approx-
imately 50-70% of the transacted volume in equity options. In fact, the fragmented
exchange landscape of equity options trading contributes to the opacity of rebalancing
ﬂows. Only a fraction of exchanges reports on detailed volume data by type of market
participant, while the remainder is invariably unobservable. Second, delta-hedgers are
not explicitly required to rebalance at the close, but may do so at diﬀerent times during
the day, or even hold on to some directional risk overnight. Third, the inventory data
provides only an end-of-day snapshot of the delta-hedgers portfolio, which disregards
intraday changes in the gamma imbalance.
To understand the impact of information uncertainty on the estimation of how Γ HP
inﬂuences end-of-day returns, we resort to a simulation study, outlined in detail in Ap-
pendix B. Figure 4 shows the results for two levels of π∈ [10%, 50%], which denotes
the probability that delta-hedgers rebalance at a diﬀerent time than between 15:30 and
16:00. We also vary the amount of unobserved ﬂuctuation σ(∆) in the empirically ob-
served gamma imbalance, relative to the ﬂuctuation of the true value, which addresses
the inﬂuence of intraday shifts in the delta-hedger’s portfolio, as well as the unobserved
portion of the total option inventory.
Given the evidence in Figure 3 that the cumulative amount of rebalancing is much
larger for ΓHP than it is for ΩLETF , we set the true impact of ΓHP on end-of-day returns
to the empirical estimate for Ω LETF of -41 as a conservative estimate in the simulation.
This true value is shown by the green line. We also highlight our empirical estimate of
around−11. The blue line denotes the average estimated coeﬃcient for 1,000 simulations
over 2,000 time steps, the blue-shaded area the 95% conﬁdence bounds.
19
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
( )
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
( HP)
True
Estimate
=10%
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
( )
=50%
Fig. 4. Simulating Error Sources in ΓHP
The ﬁgure shows the impact of unobserved ﬂuctuation in the empirical gamma estimate σ(∆) and the
probability with which option delta-hedgers may decide to rebalance their exposure at a diﬀerent time
than at the close, denoted as π. The setup of the simulation study is outlined in Appendix B. The
green line shows the true slope coeﬃcient of Γ HP in the simulation, which we ﬁx at −41, the black line
highlights our empirical estimate from Table 2. The blue line denotes the average estimated coeﬃcient
for 1,000 simulations over 2,000 time steps, the blue-shaded area the 95% conﬁdence bounds.
For a low level of π = 10% we ﬁnd that we would require a very high level of σ(∆),
about as high as the ﬂuctuation of its true value. If we increase the probability that
delta-hedgers establish delta-neutrality of their positions at their own discretion and may
deviate from the supposed hedging window at the close to 50%, we ﬁnd average coeﬃcients
much closer to our empirical estimate of ≈− 11. In fact, an uncertainty level σ(∆) of
around 0.6 generates the empirically-observed impact of Γ HP on end-of-day returns. In
the following section, we empirically investigate the level of discretion of delta-hedgers,
which can severely impede the estimation of its true impact as shown in the simulation.
3.2. Discretionary Rebalancing Times
Intraday jumps potentially present occasions where delta-hedgers are incentivized to
deviate from end-of-day hedging. Consequently, we focus on the price eﬀects of rebalanc-
ing activities following large price movements. We detect price jumps for the underlying
stocks in the case of Γ HP and the benchmark ETF for Ω LETF . For this, we compare the
return in each 30-minute interval of a given trading day with the return distribution of
the same interval over the last year. We denote stock intervals where the returns exceed
the top or bottom 2.5th percentile as jump events. We then record the cumulative return
from the previous day close up to the end of the interval when the jump has occurred
20
(rincl. jump
t ) and relate it to the return in the subsequent 30-minute interval ( rnext
t ), and
to ΓHP and ΩLETF computed using rincl. jump
t . In Table 3 we separately report results for
jump events occurring either before noon or between noon and 15:00.
As evident in column (1), we ﬁnd large and signiﬁcantly negative coeﬃcients for jumps
before noon in the case of ΓHP (−44.42, t-value:−1.98). This suggests that option delta-
hedgers rebalance their exposure shortly after particularly large price movements. We do
not ﬁnd any eﬀect for jumps in the second part of the trading day. In stark contrast to
these results, the impact for leveraged ETF rebalancing is insigniﬁcant and economically
negligible at all times, regardless of whether we consider jumps before or after noon
(columns (3) and (4)).
To further investigate how option delta-hedgers exploit the discretionary nature of
their re-hedging needs, we focus on the gamma imbalance accumulated only after a jump
event. For this, we assume the delta-hedger hedges her accrued exposure right after
the jump, and hedges the remainder once more at the close. The remaining exposure
consequently amounts to
ΓHP
j,t = 100× ΓIB
j,t−1×rafter jump
j,t , (11)
where rafter jumps measures the return of the underlying after the identiﬁed jump period
until 15:30.
The results reported in columns (5) and (6) in Table 3 provide evidence of end-of-day
rebalancing on identiﬁed jump-days only for jumps that happen after noon. In fact, the
pattern of signiﬁcance and the magnitude of coeﬃcients inversely match the pattern for
the impact of hedging directly after large price movements. Taken together, we conclude
that delta-hedgers tend to rapidly rebalance after early jumps, but decide to wait to
re-hedge after late jump events to take advantage of favorable liquidity patterns at the
close (Lou et al., 2019; Andersen and Bollerslev, 1997).
Although we ﬁnd substantial evidence that end-of-day rebalancing by delta-hedgers
impacts stock prices, the results presented here highlight the signiﬁcant uncertainty re-
garding the timing of the rebalancing activity. As the simulation study shows, this
uncertainty introduces errors in the empirical measurement of Γ HP , which attenuates its
estimated impact on end-of-day returns, driving coeﬃcients towards zero.
21
Table 3: Rebalancing Flows on Jump Days
The table reports the results to regressing intraday jump returns on returns in the subsequent 30-minute
interval. For Γ HP , we identify jumps in the underlying stock returns. For Ω LETF , we identify jumps
in the benchmark of the leveraged ETF. To detect jumps, we compare each non-overlapping 30-minute
return with returns of the same interval over the last year. If the return is higher (lower) than the 97.5%
(2.5%) percentile, we regard the return as a jump. Next, we record the return from yesterday’s close
until the end of the 30-minute interval, where the jump has occurred ( rincl. jump
t ). We collect also the
return of the subsequent 30-minute interval (rnext
t ) on the stock level. In the case of leveraged ETFs, we
select all stocks in leveraged ETFs for which a jump in the benchmark index of the leveraged ETF has
occurred. Jumps can take place before noon or after noon, but before 3pm. Equipped with rincl. jump
t ,
rnext
t , and the intraday return of the benchmark index, we reconstruct ΓHP
t and ΩLETF
t for each aﬀected
stock j. Subsequently, we run Equation (9). T-statistics are in parentheses below and are computed
using time-and-entity-clustered standard errors. ***, **, * denotes signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, 10% level.
We include entity-ﬁxed eﬀects in all speciﬁcations and value-weight observations. The sample period is
January 2012 – December 2019.
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Dependent rnext
t rnext
t rnext
t rnext
t rend
t rend
t
ΓHP
t -44.416** 0.251 -34.546 -77.316***
(-1.984) (0.013) (-1.575) (-2.668)
ΩLETF
t -0.220 -0.493
(-0.686) (-0.642)
rincl. jump
t -0.952*** -1.288*** -0.711** -0.266
(-4.240) (-6.311) (-2.083) (-1.561)
rafter jump -0.825*** -1.176***
(-3.678) (-3.955)
Observations 339,552 305,694 500,036 293,872 339,552 305,694
R2 (%) 0.160 0.199 0.057 0.029 0.101 0.112
Entity FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Time FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
SEs [t;j] [t;j] [t;j] [t;j] [t;j] [t;j]
Jumps Until Pre-Noon After-Noon Pre-Noon After-Noon Pre-Noon After-Noon
3.3. Reversal
If the mechanical rebalancing activities of delta-hedgers and leveraged ETF swap
counterparties move prices suﬃciently far from fundamental values, we should observe
a quick reversal of these eﬀects at the next open as other market participants enter the
market and correct these deviations. Consequently, we expect returns on the following
market open to relate positively to ΓHP and negatively to ΩLETF . To test this hypothesis,
22
we run the panel regression
rnight
j,t =β0rend
j,t +β1ΓHP
j,t +β2ΩLETF
j,t +FEj +FEt +ϵj,t, (12)
where rnight
j,t is the return from the close of day t to 10:00 on day t + 1.
Table 4: Next-Day Reversal
The table reports the results to regressing returns from closure of day t to 10:00 on day t + 1 on returns
until 15:30, rpre, on option hedging pressure Γ HP and leveraged ETF rebalancing quantity Ω LETF
following Equation (9). We also consider the return from 15:30 of day t to 10:00 on t + 1,rend+night, and
the 24h return from day t’s 15:30 to day t + 1’s 15:30,rend+next pre, as dependent variables. T-statistics
are in parentheses below and are computed using time-and-entity-clustered standard errors. ***, **, *
denotes signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, 10% level. We include entity ﬁxed eﬀects in all speciﬁcations and
value-weight observations. The sample period is January 2012 – December 2019.
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Dependent rnight
t rnight
t rnight
t rend+night rend+next pre
rpre
t 0.951** 1.268*** 1.057*** 0.235 -0.626
(2.444) (3.126) (2.737) (0.585) (-1.163)
ΓHP
t 25.573*** 28.118*** 17.132* 13.316
(3.208) (3.427) (1.844) (1.551)
ΩLETF
t -70.943*** -79.521*** -32.584 -40.628
(-3.382) (-3.634) (-1.515) (-1.402)
Observations 1,882,234 1,882,234 1,882,234 1,882,234 1,879,754
R2 (%) 0.030 0.028 0.040 0.007 0.006
Entity FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Time FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
SEs [t;j] [t;j] [t;j] [t;j] [t;j]
Table 4 highlights the relatively swift reversal of the impact of Γ HP and ΩLETF : the
coeﬃcient on ΓHP in column (1) is positive at 25.57 (t-value: 3.28), while that on ΩLETF
in column (2) is negative at −70.95 (t-value: −3.38). In column (3), we include both
rebalancing ﬂows jointly and show a magniﬁcation of the proposed reversal eﬀects for
both.
In order to assess if the initial price impact is fully reverted over night, we substitute
the overnight return in Equation (12) by the return from 15:30 of day t to 10:00 on
t + 1,rend+night. A full reversal of the eﬀect would render the impact of Γ HP and ΩLETF
on rend+night insigniﬁcant. As column (4) in Table 4 shows, this is the case for Ω LETF .
However, the coeﬃcient on Γ HP is statistically signiﬁcant at the 10% level, suggesting
23
that rebalancing ﬂows from delta-hedgers take more time to be fully reversed. Indeed,
we observe a full reversal eﬀect for the impact of gamma rebalancing when considering
the return from t’s 15:30 to t + 1’s 15:30, rend+next pre, as shown in column (5).
3.4. Liquidity Provision
How do market participants react when delta-hedgers or leveraged ETF swap coun-
terparties have to trade particularly large quantities of a certain stock? Strategic traders
could engage in predatory trading by amplifying the rebalancing activities from op-
tion delta-hedgers and leveraged ETF swap counterparties (Brunnermeier and Pedersen,
2005). Predators initially buy (sell) the underlying while rebalancing ﬂows exert signif-
icant buying (selling) pressure and unwind their position as the rebalancing concludes.
Contrarily, strategic traders may provide liquidity instead, which Admati and Pﬂeiderer
(1991) term a sunshine equilibrium. In this scenario, the price impact of rebalancing ﬂows
is minimized.
To investigate how strategic traders react to large rebalancing ﬂows, we augment
Equation (9) with a dummy interaction for days when the rebalancing ﬂow exceeds a
certain percentile:
rend
j,t =β0rpre
j,t +β1Ϝj,t +β2Ϝj,t× Lj,t,x +FEj +FEt +ϵj,t, (13)
where Ϝ is one of our two proxies for order ﬂow, and Lj,t,x is a dummy variable that is equal
to 1 if the absolute magnitude of the respective rebalancing ﬂow of stock j exceeds the
xth cross-sectional percentile. We consider three thresholds for x, i.e, x∈{ 95, 97.5, 99}.
Columns (1) to (3) of Table 5 report the results for Γ HP , whereas columns (4) to (6)
do so for Ω LETF . The estimated coeﬃcients for the interaction terms are positive, but
not statistically signiﬁcant for Γ HP , implying that we neither ﬁnd evidence in favor of
predatory trading nor in favor of a sunshine equilibrium. On the contrary, the estimated
coeﬃcients for ΩLETF rebalancing ﬂows are negative and highly signiﬁcant for large ﬂows
that exceed the 95th percentile of Ω LETF . We ﬁnd a monotonic increase in β2 in the
threshold used to identify large leveraged ETF rebalancing ﬂows. This pattern is consis-
tent with a sunshine equilibrium in the spirit of Admati and Pﬂeiderer (1991), in which
other market participants accommodate the liquidity needs by large rebalancing ﬂows
from leveraged ETFs.
Table D3 in the Appendix provides supporting evidence using the change in the bid-
ask spread of individual stocks. A shock to the absolute value of Γ HP prompts market
24
Table 5: Liquidity Provision Around Large Rebalancing Flows
The table reports the results to regressing returns in the last half hour of a trading day on returns
until 15:30 on delta-hedging and leveraged ETF rebalancing ﬂows including dummy variables for large
rebalancing ﬂows. L j,t,x is a dummy variable that is equal to 1 if the size of the respective rebalancing
ﬂow of stock j exceeds the xth cross-sectional percentile of the absolute rebalancing ﬂow. We consider
three thresholds for x, i.e, x∈{ 95, 97.5, 99}. T-statistics are in parentheses below and are computed
using time-and-entity-clustered standard errors. ***, **, * denotes signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, 10% level.
We include entity-ﬁxed eﬀects in all speciﬁcations and value-weight observations.
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Dependent rend
t rend
t rend
t rend
t rend
t rend
t
ΓHP
t -11.588*** -11.294*** -10.333***
(-3.407) (-4.358) (-4.114)
ΓHP
t × Lt,x 2.828 3.252 2.696
(1.081) (1.373) (0.855)
ΩLETF
t 57.027*** 53.729*** 49.683***
(4.803) (5.230) (5.672)
ΩLETF
t × Lt,x -22.267** -26.226*** -30.561***
(-2.327) (-2.725) (-3.111)
rpre
t -0.754*** -0.753*** -0.755*** -0.909*** -0.908*** -0.908***
(-6.905) (-6.902) (-6.894) (-8.212) (-8.183) (-8.187)
Observations 1,882,332 1,882,332 1,882,332 1,882,332 1,882,332 1,882,332
R2 (%) 0.284 0.285 0.284 0.334 0.335 0.333
Entity FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Time FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
SEs [t;j] [t;j] [t;j] [t;j] [t;j] [t;j]
xth perc. 95.0 97.5 99.0 95.0 97.5 99.0
makers in the underlying stock to increase the corresponding spreads in advance. In
contrast, we ﬁnd no such evidence for rebalancing ﬂows from leveraged ETFs. Together
with the results regarding large ﬂows in Table 5, we ﬁnd convincing evidence in favor of
a better liquidity provision for the ﬂows of leveraged ETF counterparties, driven by a
greater transparency on their timing and of their magnitude. Conversely, market makers
in the underlying stocks face the risk of adverse selection from the ﬂows of option market
makers due to their opaque nature and discretionary timing.
25
3.5. Trading Strategies
Next, we quantify the economic signiﬁcance of these frictions by studying trading
strategies that use Γ HP and ΩLETF as timing signals. First, we construct a long-short
portfolio based on ΓHP . On each trading day at 15:30, we sort our stock sample according
to ΓHP into decile portfolios. Subsequently, we build a long-short strategy, denoted by
LmHΓ, by taking a long (short) position in the lowest (highest) decile portfolio. We
close our positions at the market close of the same trading day, such that the strategy
is active for only 30 minutes each day. In the second strategy, HmL Ω, we use ΩLETF as
a timing signal. We construct decile portfolios based on Ω LETF and take a long (short)
position in the highest (lowest) decile. Finally, we use both Γ HP and ΩLETF as signals
in a combined strategy. For each stock at 15:30, we sort our stock sample according to
their aggregate imbalance Ω LETF − ΓHP into decile portfolios and subsequently build a
long-short strategy, denoted by HmL Γ,Ω.
Table 6: ΓHP and ΩLETF Based Trading Strategies
The table reports the economic value of timing the last half-hour market return using using Γ HP ,
ΩLETF and a joint signal based on both. The Γ HP -strategy, LmHΓ, takes a long (short) position in
a stock when the stock’s Γ HP is in the lowest (highest) decile. The Ω LETF -strategy, HmLΩ, takes a
long (short) position in a stock when the stock’s Ω LETF is in the highest (lowest) decile. The combined
strategy, HmLΓ,Ω, computes a cross-sectional rank according to ΓHP and ΩLETF and takes a long (short)
position in a stock when the stock’s aggregated ranking is in the highest (lowest) decile. As a benchmark,
Marketend denotes investing in all stocks from 15:30 to 16:00. Portfolios are value-weighted, including
for Marketend. For each strategy, we report the average return (Avg ret), standard deviation (Std dev),
Sharpe ratio (Sharpe), Sharpe ratio assuming an eﬀective spread of 25% of the quoted bid-ask spread (Net
Sharpe), skewness, kurtosis, and success rate (Success). The returns are annualized and in percentage.
Newey and West (1987) robust t-statistics are in parentheses, and signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, or 10%
level is denoted by ***, **, or *, respectively. The sample period is January 2012 – December 2019.
Avg ret Std dev Sharpe Net Sharpe Skewness Kurtosis Success
LmHΓ 5.20*** 1.36 3.83 1.76 0.17 3.00 61.07
HmLΩ 5.78*** 2.31 2.51 0.05 0.13 3.54 56.29
HmLΓ,Ω 6.63*** 1.54 4.29 1.77 0.27 2.80 62.70
Marketend -1.39 3.26 -0.43 -0.43 -1.05 12.27 51.92
Table 6 reports summary statistics of the resulting strategies using value-weighted
portfolios. LmH Γ yields an average total excess return equal to 5.20% per year which are
signiﬁcant at the 1%-level. Although HmL Ω yields a slightly higher average total excess
return per year, 5.78%, LmH Γ exhibits a higher Sharpe ratio (3.83 vs. 2.51). Similarly,
we observe higher success ratios for LmH Γ compared to HmL Ω (61% vs. 56%).
26
The combination of the two signals ΩLETF and ΓHP reduces the noise and improves the
success ratio with an increase in the average return to 6.62% per year, which is signiﬁcant
at the 1%-level. Consistent with this, the combined strategy exhibits the highest (gross)
Sharpe ratio of 4.29 and a success rate of 62%. It is notable that the skewness of the three
strategies are positive, compared to the negative skewness of the return on the market.
12
Table 7: Risk-adjusted Returns of ΓHP and ΩLETF Trading Strategies
The table reports the estimation results from regressing returns of strategies timing the last half-hour
based on Γ HP , ΩLETF and a combination of both on the returns of all stocks from 15:30 to 16:00
(Marketend), the equity market excess return (MKT), size (SMB), book-to-market (HML), proﬁtability
(RMW), investment (CMA), momentum (MOM), and an intermediary capital asset pricing factor (IC,
proposed by He et al., 2017). The ΓHP -strategy, LmHΓ, takes a long (short) position in a stock when the
stock’s ΓHP is in the lowest (highest) decile. The Ω LETF -strategy, HmLΩ, takes a long (short) position
in a stock when the stock’s Ω LETF is in the highest (lowest) decile. The combined strategy, HmL Γ,Ω,
computes a cross-sectional rank according to Γ HP and ΩLETF and takes a long (short) position in a
stock when the stock’s aggregated ranking is in the highest (lowest) decile. Portfolios are value-weighted.
Newey and West (1987) robust t-statistics are in parentheses, and signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, or 10%
level is denoted by ***, **, or *, respectively. The sample period is January 2012 – December 2019.
Intercept Marketend MKT SMB HML RMW CMA MOM IC R2 R2 adj
LmHΓ 5.21 0.01 0.03% -0.02%
(9.37***) (0.42)
4.84 1.24 1.11 0.46 2.89 0.89 2.13 0.72 0.88% 0.45%
(7.99***) (1.00) (0.88) (0.27) (1.58) (0.31) (2.10**) (0.86)
HmLΩ 5.77 -0.01 0.02% -0.03%
(6.07***) (-0.30)
6.22 0.24 0.93 -1.11 -4.98 1.03 -4.06 -1.04 0.72% 0.29%
(5.87***) (0.09) (0.42) (-0.36) (-1.27) (0.25) (-2.87***) (-0.61)
HmLΓ,Ω 6.66 0.02 0.2% 0.1%
(10.24***) (1.82*)
6.30 3.05 0.19 -0.38 -0.02 4.79 1.30 -0.02 1.10% 0.70%
(8.70***) (2.62***) (0.12) (-0.19) (-0.01) (1.55) (1.14) (-0.02)
Because of the signiﬁcant turnover ratio required in such a strategy, it is important
to investigate the potential impact of transaction costs if an trader were to implement
such a strategy. We assume an eﬀective spread of 25% of the quoted bid-ask spread
at 15:30 as a measure for transaction costs. As evident from Table 6, we ﬁnd that the
trading strategy based on Γ HP continues to yield high risk-adjusted performance with a
net Sharpe ratio of 1.76. On the other hand, the net Sharpe ratio for HmL Ω is reduced
to 0.05. The strategy that combines the two signals HmL Γ,Ω generates the highest net
12To put this in context, Jiang, Kelly, and Xiu (2020) use convolutional neural networks on price path
images to predict the future return direction. They achieve a success rate of up to 53 .6%.
27
Sharpe ratio, which is equal to 1.77. This conﬁrms that the economic frictions generated
by these two channels jointly are indeed economically signiﬁcant, although Γ HP plays a
greater role.
How much of these strategies’ end-of-day returns are explained by exposure to well-
established risk factors? Table 7 summarizes the results of regressing LmH Γ, HmL Ω,
and HmLΓ,Ω on the end-of-day market return (Market end) and the full-day Fama-French
ﬁve-factor model (Fama and French, 2015), augmented by a momentum as well as an
intermediary capital asset pricing factor (He et al., 2017). 13 We ﬁnd that neither the
market nor the augmented ﬁve-factor model can explain the returns of LmH Γ, HmL Ω,
and HmLΓ,Ω. The R2 is small on average. The only factor that is statistically signiﬁcant
for the joint strategy is MKT, the other factors in the extended ﬁve-factor model are
not signiﬁcant. Notwithstanding the statistical importance of MKT, the alphas of these
regressions are statistically signiﬁcant and virtually unchanged and account for almost
the entire average gross excess return.
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7Absolute t-statistics
LETF
HP
Fig. 5. Rolling Regressions
The ﬁgure shows the absolute t-statistics of estimated Γ HP and ΩLETF coeﬃcients over time, as mea-
sured on a rolling basis for each three year-period starting in January 2012. Speciﬁcally, we estimate
Equation (9) for the ﬁrst three years in our sample, shift the starting and end date by one day and repeat
this for all days in the sample (January 2012 – December 2019).
13Data on the Fama-French ﬁve-factor model and the momentum factor is taken from
Kenneth French’s website, https://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_
library.html, whereas data on the intermediary capital asset pricing factor is obtained from Zhiguo He’s
website, https://voices.uchicago.edu/zhiguohe/data-and-empirical-patterns/intermediary-
capital-ratio-and-risk-factor/ .
28
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
0
20
40
60
80
100
Percentage of HP Variance Explained by First Two Principal Components
PC1
PC2
70.3%
21.7%
69.1%
21.9%
67.5%
21.8%
67.5%
21.1%
68.6%
21.1%
71.9%
19.1%
79.0%
18.3%
83.8%
14.1%
PHLX
CBOE
NOM
ISE
GEMX
AMEX
ARCA
BZX
Rest
Fig. 6. Market Share of Option Exchange Volume
The ﬁgure shows the annual share of transacted volume in equity options on each U.S. options exchange.
The market share is given for the ﬁve option exchanges in our sample (PHLX, CBOE, NOM, ISE, and
GEMX), as well as the three largest exchanges among the remainder (AMEX, ARCA, and BZX). Rest
combines volumes on exchanges BOX, BXO, C2, EDGX, EMLD, MERC, MIAX, and PEARL. The upper
part of the ﬁgure shows the percentage of ΓHP variance explained by the ﬁrst two principal components
across all option exchanges in our sample on a year-by-year basis. PC1 and PC2 denote the ﬁrst and
second principal component, respectively.
3.6. The Evolution of the Imbalance and its Price Impact
We investigate how the price impact of ΓHP and ΩLETF changed over time by running our
baseline regression using a rolling window of three years. Figure 5 displays the absolute
t-statistics of the coeﬃcients for ΓHP (blue line) and for ΩLETF (green line). We ﬁnd that
the statistical signiﬁcance of ΓHP has stayed nearly unchanged until the end of 2016 and
has since then further increased. On the other hand, the estimated signiﬁcance for ΩLETF
has decreased over time. Figure E1 in Appendix E shows that the diﬀerence in statistical
signiﬁcance over time is also reﬂected in the performance of the timing strategies based
on ΓHP and ΩLETF .
A probable reason for the diﬀerence in the statistical performance over time lies in the
high fragmentation of the U.S. options market, which reduces the availability and quality
of information about the inventory positions of delta-hedgers. 14 This limits the ability of
arbitrageurs to construct a precise measure of the rebalancing demand of delta-hedgers.
Figure 6 shows the year-by-year market share for the ﬁve exchanges in our sample, as
well as the three largest remaining exchanges, measured by volume in 2019. The ﬁgure
shows a trend towards higher dispersion of option volumes across exchanges. This was
helped by the opening of new exchanges in recent years, which allows market makers to
14See Andersen, Archakov, Grund, Hautsch, Li, Nasekin, Nolte, Pham, Taylor, and Todorov (2021)
for a current account on the history of the U.S. options market.
29
strategically hide information about their inventory positions. At the start of the sample,
there were nine active option exchanges; since then, seven new exchanges have been
opened (Andersen et al., 2021). These new exchanges represent about a ﬁfth of the entire
volume in equity options in 2019. Moreover, not all option venues provided information
useful to approximate the inventory of delta-hedgers. For example, AMEX and ARCA,
which correspond to roughly 30% of traded options volume at the start of our sample,
started reporting a detailed breakdown of option volumes in March of 2022 (NYSE, 2022).
The latter informational friction can be mitigated if option inventories of delta-hedgers are
highly correlated across option exchanges. We run a principal component decomposition
of the gamma imbalance across the option exchanges for which we observe the data. We
ﬁnd that the ﬁrst principal component can explain between 67% and 84% of the total
variance of the gamma imbalance. The second principal component explains between
14% and 22%, suggesting that information from multiple exchanges is indeed needed to
obtain a precise proxy of the aggregate gamma imbalance. We also ﬁnd that the average
3-year rolling correlations range from 30% to 80% and are decreasing for ISE and CBOE
over time (see Figure OA4.1). These results suggest the presence of an informational
friction that may explain why the abnormal excess returns earned by strategies based on
ΓHP have been large and persistent.
4. Conclusion
A growing literature focuses on cross-sectional intraday return variation, linking it to
investor heterogeneity on the stock level. In this paper, we provide novel insights into how
derivative markets add to cross-sectional variation towards the end of the trading day.
By drawing upon a unique dataset merging data from several exchanges identifying types
of market participants in U.S. stock options and the portfolio composition of U.S. equity-
focused leveraged ETFs, we document large price pressure on end-of-day returns when
option market makers engage in delta-hedging and leveraged ETF swap counterparties
rebalance their positional exposure.
We show that delta-hedging and leveraged ETF rebalancing exert an economically
large price pressure on end-of-day returns. Whereas leveraged ETFs contribute to a
basket-wide momentum eﬀect, delta-hedging can either have a stabilizing eﬀect in the
form of end-of-day reversal, but may also exaggerate intraday momentum. The direction
is determined by the previous return of the underlying and the aggregate option inven-
tory of market makers. Moreover, our results reveal that option market makers have
30
discretion on the execution of their hedging strategies, especially after intraday jumps.
On the contrary, leveraged ETF swap counterparties are required to establish the target
exposure of the fund at the close. This institutional ﬂexibility translates into information
asymmetry faced by liquidity providers, constituting a friction for liquidity provision.
Consistent with the assumption that the impact of rebalancing is mechanical in nature,
we also document that it is transitory, as the eﬀects fully reverse during the next trad-
ing day. Such a reversal materializes in a shorter time frame for leveraged ETFs price
pressure than for that induced by gamma imbalances.
We ﬁnally show that the eﬀect of option market imbalances is persistent over the
years, while that of leveraged ETFs is signiﬁcantly decreasing, further suggesting a key
role of information asymmetry as the main friction underlying their dynamics.
31
References
Admati, A. R., Pﬂeiderer, P., 1991. Sunshine trading and ﬁnancial market equilibrium.
Review of Financial Studies 4, 443–481.
Andersen, T., Archakov, I., Grund, L., Hautsch, N., Li, Y., Nasekin, S., Nolte, I., Pham,
M. C., Taylor, S., Todorov, V., 2021. A descriptive study of high-frequency trade and
quote option data. Journal of Financial Econometrics 19, 128–177.
Andersen, T. G., Bollerslev, T., 1997. Intraday periodicity and volatility persistence in
ﬁnancial markets. Journal of Empirical Finance 4, 115–158.
Baltussen, G., Da, Z., Lammers, S., Martens, M., 2021. Hedging demand and market
intraday momentum. Journal of Financial Economics 142, 377–403.
Barbon, A., Buraschi, A., 2020. Gamma fragility. Working paper, University of St.Gallen,
School of Finance Research Paper.
Ben-David, I., Franzoni, F., Moussawi, R., 2018. Do etfs increase volatility? Journal of
Finance 73, 2471–2535.
Benveniste, L. M., Marcus, A. J., Wilhelm, W. J., 1992. What’s special about the spe-
cialist? Journal of Financial Economics 32, 61–86.
Blau, B. M., Nguyen, N., Whitby, R. J., 2014. The information content of option ratios.
Journal of Banking & Finance 43, 179 – 187.
Bogousslavsky, V., 2020. The Cross-Section of Intraday and Overnight Returns. Working
paper.
Bogousslavsky, V., Muravyev, D., 2020. Who trades at the close? implications for price
discovery, liquidity. Working paper.
Brøgger, S. B., 2021. The market impact of predictable ﬂows: Evidence from leveraged
vix products. Journal of Banking & Finance 133, 106280.
Brunnermeier, M. K., Pedersen, L. H., 2005. Predatory trading. Journal of Finance 60,
1825–1863.
32
Chen, H., Joslin, S., Ni, S. X., 2019. Demand for Crash Insurance, Intermediary Con-
straints, and Risk Premia in Financial Markets. Review of Financial Studies 32, 228–
265.
Cheng, M., Madhavan, A., 2010. The dynamics of leveraged and inverse exchange-traded
funds. Journal of Investment Management 7, 43–62.
Chordia, T., Kurov, A., Muravyev, D., Subrahmanyam, A., 2021. Index option trading
activity and market returns. Management Science 67, 1758–1778.
Cremers, M., Weinbaum, D., 2010. Deviations from put-call parity and stock return
predictability. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 45, 335–367.
Easley, D., O’Hara, M., Srinivas, P. S., 1998. Option volume and stock prices: Evidence
on where informed traders trade. Journal of Finance 53, 431–465.
Fama, E. F., French, K. R., 2015. A ﬁve-factor asset pricing model. Journal of Financial
Economics 116, 1–22.
Forster, M. M., George, T. J., 1992. Anonymity in securities markets. Journal of Financial
Intermediation 2, 168–206.
Fournier, M., Jacobs, K., 2020. A Tractable Framework for Option Pricing with Dynamic
Market Maker Inventory and Wealth. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis
55, 1117–1162.
Frey, R., 1998. Perfect option hedging for a large trader. Finance and Stochastics 2,
115–141.
Frey, R., Stremme, A., 1997. Market volatility and feedback eﬀects from dynamic hedging.
Mathematical Finance 7, 351–374.
Gao, L., Han, Y., Zhengzi Li, S., Zhou, G., 2018. Market intraday momentum. Journal
of Financial Economics 129, 394–414.
Ge, L., Lin, T.-C., Pearson, N. D., 2016. Why does the option to stock volume ratio
predict stock returns? Journal of Financial Economics 120, 601–622.
Gemmill, G., 1996. Transparency and liquidity: A study of block trades on the london
stock exchange under diﬀerent publication rules. Journal of Finance 51, 1765–1790.
33
Golez, B., Jackwerth, J. C., 2012. Pinning in the s&p 500 futures. Journal of Financial
Economics 106, 566 – 585.
Gˆ arleanu, N., Pedersen, L. H., Poteshman, A. M., 2009. Demand-Based Option Pricing.
Review of Financial Studies 22, 4259–4299.
He, Z., Kelly, B., Manela, A., 2017. Intermediary asset pricing: New evidence from many
asset classes. Journal of Financial Economics 126, 1–35.
Heston, S. L., Korajczyk, R. A., Sadka, R., 2010. Intraday patterns in the cross-section
of stock returns. Journal of Finance 65, 1369–1407.
Holden, C. W., Jacobsen, S., 2014. Liquidity measurement problems in fast, competitive
markets: Expensive and cheap solutions. Journal of Finance 69, 1747–1785.
Hu, J., 2014. Does option trading convey stock price information α. Journal of Financial
Economics 111, 625–645.
Jacobs, K., Mai, A. T., 2020. The role of intermediaries in derivatives markets: Evidence
from vix options. Working paper.
Jiang, J., Kelly, B. T., Xiu, D., 2020. (re-) imag (in) ing price trends. Chicago Booth
Research Paper .
Johnson, T., Liang, M., Liu, Y., 2016. What Drives Index Options Exposures?*. Review
of Finance 22, 561–593.
Johnson, T. L., So, E. C., 2012. The option to stock volume ratio and future returns.
Journal of Financial Economics 106, 262–286.
Komarov, O., 2017. Intra-day momentum. Working paper.
Lou, D., Polk, C., Skouras, S., 2019. A tug of war: Overnight versus intraday expected
returns. Journal of Financial Economics 134, 192–213.
Madhavan, A., 1995. Consolidation, fragmentation, and the disclosure of trading infor-
mation. Review of Financial Studies 8, 579–603.
Madhavan, A., 2000. Market microstructure: A survey. Journal of ﬁnancial markets 3,
205–258.
34
Moskowitz, T. J., Ooi, Y. H., Pedersen, L. H., 2012. Time series momentum. Journal of
Financial Economics 104, 228 – 250, special Issue on Investor Sentiment.
Ni, S. X., Pan, J., Poteshman, A. M., 2008. Volatility information trading in the option
market. Journal of Finance 63, 1059–1091.
Ni, S. X., Pearson, N. D., Poteshman, A. M., 2005. Stock price clustering on option
expiration dates. Journal of Financial Economics 78, 49–87.
Ni, S. X., Pearson, N. D., Poteshman, A. M., White, J., 2020. Does Option Trading
Have a Pervasive Impact on Underlying Stock Prices? Review of Financial Studies 34,
1952–1986.
NYSE, 2022. Nyse options open/close volume summary client speciﬁcation. Tech. report.
Pan, J., Poteshman, A. M., 2006. The Information in Option Volume for Future Stock
Prices. Review of Financial Studies 19, 871–908.
Platen, E., Schweizer, M., 1998. On feedback eﬀects from hedging derivatives. Mathe-
matical Finance 8, 67–84.
Porter, D. C., Weaver, D. G., 1998. Post-trade transparency on nasdaq’s national market
system. Journal of Financial Economics 50, 231–252.
Roll, R., Schwartz, E., Subrahmanyam, A., 2010. O/s: The relative trading activity in
options and stock. Journal of Financial Economics 96, 1 – 17.
Shim, J. J., Todorov, K., 2021. Etfs, illiquid assets, and ﬁre sales. Working paper.
Shum, P., Hejazi, W., Haryanto, E., Rodier, A., 2016. Intraday share price volatility and
leveraged etf rebalancing. Review of Finance 20, 2379–2409.
Sircar, K. R., Papanicolaou, G., 1998. General black-scholes models accounting for in-
creased market volatility from hedging strategies. Applied Mathematical Finance 5,
45–82.
Tuzun, T., 2014. Are leveraged and inverse etfs the new portfolio insurers? In: Paris
December 2014 Finance Meeting EUROFIDAI-AFFI Paper .
Wilmott, P., Sch¨ onbucher, P. J., 2000. The feedback eﬀect of hedging in illiquid markets.
SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics 61, 232–272.
35
Wu, Y., Jegadeesh, N., 2020. Closing auctions: Information content and timeliness of
price reaction. Working paper.
36
Appendix A. Detailed Summary Statistics on ΓHP and
ΩLETF
Table A1 provides detailed summary statistics on the main variables of interest in the
main paper.
Table A1: Summary Statistics
The table reports means, standard deviations, and quantiles for the gamma, leveraged ETF variables
and returns used in the regression models. The descriptive statistics are ﬁrst computed for each day
and subsequently averaged across all days. rpre, rnight and rend are denoted in basis points. ADV end is
given in million USD. RSVOL end, ΓIB , ΓHP , ΩLETF and their corresponding absolute values are given
percentage. The sample period is from January 2012 to December 2019.
Mean Std 2.5% 10% 25% 50% 75% 90% 97.5%
rpre 4.75 203.33 -379.68 -187.53 -81.11 4.67 89.38 194.47 394.41
rend 0.02 35.56 -73.4 -38.44 -17.9 -0.53 17.21 38.98 77.24
rnight 4.16 167.3 -249.0 -117.38 -50.88 2.97 57.01 125.12 267.0
ADVend 21.72 59.1 0.25 0.78 2.19 6.79 19.94 47.4 136.93
RSVOLend 0.56 41.86 -86.08 -48.77 -23.39 0.49 24.45 50.03 87.63
ΓIB 0.52 3.0 -3.96 -1.32 -0.26 0.08 0.93 2.91 6.99
|ΓIB| 1.45 2.67 0.0 0.03 0.14 0.55 1.67 3.76 8.03
ΓHP 0.04 3.27 -7.0 -2.25 -0.48 0.0 0.51 2.37 7.28
|ΓHP| 1.61 2.86 0.0 0.02 0.1 0.48 1.75 4.51 10.38
ΩLETF 0.15 1.79 -2.97 -1.72 -0.86 0.1 1.11 2.08 3.48
|ΩLETF| 1.65 1.75 0.03 0.16 0.42 1.03 2.37 3.92 6.25
ΩLETF− ΓHP 0.11 3.81 -7.99 -3.29 -1.27 0.1 1.52 3.56 8.1
|ΩLETF− ΓHP| 2.64 3.14 0.05 0.22 0.61 1.63 3.48 6.25 11.43
37
Appendix B. Errors in Measuring ΓHP – A Simula-
tion Study
We simulate returns from last day’s close to 15:30 ( rpre) and during the last half
hour of a trading day (rend), as well as the true Gamma imbalance of market makers for
N = 1000 stocks, over a total of T = 2000 time steps, mirroring the eight years of daily
data in our sample.
We allow the delta-hedger to deviate from hedging at the close. She will hedge during
a diﬀerent time with probability π, i.e. p∼ Bern(π), such that the true Gamma hedging
pressure for stock j on day t equals
ΓHP
j,t (∗) =rpre
j,t × ΓIB
j,t (∗)×p,
where rpre
j,t ∼N (0,σ pre = 0.08). The choice of whether the market maker hedges end-of-
day is inherently unobservable to other market participants. At the same time, Γ IB(∗)
may only be approximated with the market maker’s inventory measured at the end of
the last trading day. Intraday changes in the Gamma proﬁle are likewise unobservable.
Consequently, the empirically-observed hedging pressure is measured with error:
ΓHP
j,t =rpre
j,t × (ΓIB
j,t (∗) +εΓ)j,t,
where εΓ∼N [0,σ ∆× (σpre +σpost)
√
2], such that the standard deviation is scaled as a
fraction of the variation of the true but unobservable Γ IB(∗).
Next, imply a direct relationship between end-of-day returns and Γ HP (∗),
rend
j,t =βΓ(∗)× ΓHP
j,t (∗) +εpost
j,t ,
withεpost∼N (0,σ post) and σpost = 0.04. We set the true slope coeﬃcient βΓ(∗) to−41,
mimicking the impact of leveraged ETF rebalancing. Empirically, we can estimate the
impact of Gamma rebalancing on end-of-day returns only through the noisy proxy Γ HP :
rend
j,t =βΓ× ΓHP
j,t +εpost
j,t ,
We are consequently interested in how the degree of noise ( σ∆) and probability of dis-
cretionary trading at a diﬀerent time than the close (π) impact the empirical estimate of
the slope coeﬃcient, βΓ. Results to this are shown in Figure 4.
38
Appendix C. Controlling for Risk- and Information-
based Alternative Explanations
The unveiled empirical relationship may be consistent with alternative hypotheses. In
particular, it may arise from intraday oscillations in the level of risk, for volatility-target
investors might rebalance their portfolio away from risky assets towards the end of the
trading day if volatility changes, generating directional order ﬂow. Since option demand
is also a positive function of investors expectations about future volatility, changes in risk
may impact the inventory of market makers and, potentially, their Γ imbalance. These
two observations may generate a mechanical and negative relationship between gamma
imbalance and order-ﬂow, driven by the dynamics of expected volatility.
To rule out the above explanations, speciﬁcations in columns (1) to (3) in Table C2 add
controls for proxies of expected volatility, namely the level of the at-the-money implied
volatility (IV ) on day t− 1 and forecasts of future variance using an EGARCH model,
ˆRV
end
and ˆRV
pre
. The EGARCH models the sum of 1-minute squared returns for each
stock in the last half hour of a trading day, using historical data up until day t− 1 (see
Moskowitz, Ooi, and Pedersen, 2012).
Results show that neither of these two controls is signiﬁcant, nor does the inclusion
of either materially alter the coeﬃcient and statistical signiﬁcance of Γ HP and ΩLETF .
Besides risk-based explanations, our ﬁndings may arise from information being trans-
mitted from the options market to the market of the underlying. A stream of the literature
argues that options are often used because of their implicit leverage in presence of market
frictions, for instance when short selling is expensive (Ge et al., 2016). Accordingly, Blau
et al. (2014) ﬁnd that an increase in the put-call ratio negatively predicts future returns
at the daily, weekly, and monthly frequency. Roll et al. (2010) and Hu (2014) show
that the option-to-stock volume predicts options’ underlying returns. We thus extend
the baseline regression to control for these explanatory variables. Columns (4) and (5)
summarize the results and show that the coeﬃcients on Γ HP and ΩLETF are unchanged
both in magnitude and signiﬁcance, suggesting that our results are not driven by an
information channel.
39
Table C2: Controlling for Risk-based and Informational Channels
The table reports the results to regressing the returns in the last half hour of a trading day on returns until
15:30 (rpre), on options market maker hedging pressure Γ HP and leveraged ETF rebalancing quantity
ΩLETF following Equation (9). IVt−1 denotes implied volatility at timet−1. ˆRV
end
t ( ˆRV
pre
t ) denote the
square root of predicted realized variance for the time period from 15:30 to 16:00 (from previous day’s
close to 15:30) on day t. PCt−1 is the put-call-ratio and O/S$
t−1 denotes the option-to-stock volume
in dollar terms. T-statistics are in parentheses below and are computed using time-and-entity-clustered
standard errors. ***, **, * denotes signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, 10% level. We include entity-ﬁxed eﬀects
in all speciﬁcations and value-weight observations. The sample period is 2012 – 2019.
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Dependent rend
t rend
t rend
t rend
t rend
t rend
t
ΓHP
t -10.925*** -10.958*** -10.938*** -10.961*** -10.961*** -10.914***
(-5.513) (-5.522) (-5.507) (-5.521) (-5.523) (-5.503)
ΩLETF
t 46.832*** 46.768*** 46.790*** 46.755*** 46.738*** 46.835***
(5.208) (5.202) (5.198) (5.195) (5.198) (5.204)
rpre
t -0.822*** -0.820*** -0.820*** -0.820*** -0.820*** -0.821***
(-7.460) (-7.453) (-7.452) (-7.453) (-7.452) (-7.454)
IVt−1 4.463*** 4.040***
(5.079) (5.086)
ˆRV
pre
t 19.132 -28.421*
(1.065) (-1.754)
ˆRV
end
t 414.582*** 336.520***
(3.156) (2.777)
PCt−1 0.005 -0.003
(0.030) (-0.019)
O/S$
t−1 255.550 100.469
(0.782) (0.321)
Observations 1,882,332 1,882,236 1,882,236 1,879,828 1,882,327 1,879,753
R2 (%) 0.388 0.371 0.380 0.370 0.370 0.393
Entity FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Time FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
SEs [t;j] [t;j] [t;j] [t;j] [t;j] [t;j]
40
Appendix D. Liquidity Provision: Evidence from Spreads
This appendix provides additional evidence of impeded liquidity provision for Gamma
rebalancing ﬂows, which potentially arises because of their opacity. To do so, we measure
the relative change in the bid-ask spread on each stock as
ˆSt = S16:00:00
t −S15:30:00
t∑15:00:00
τ=09:30:00Sτ
t/12
, with St =askt−bidt,
and regress it on rebalancing ﬂows ΓHP and ΩLETF . Table D3 shows that market makers
active in the stocks underlying options with large rebalancing ﬂows increase the corre-
sponding spreads to alleviate the issue of adverse selection. We ﬁnd no such evidence for
rebalancing ﬂows from leveraged ETFs.
Table D3: Spreads and Rebalancing Flows
The table reports the results to regressing the relative change in the bid-ask spread on Γ HP and ΩLETF .
We measure the relative change in the spread as ˆSt = S16:00:00
t −S15:30:00
t∑15:00:00
τ =09:30:00Sτ
t/12 , where St = askt−bidt using
consolidated national best bid and oﬀer quotes from the NYSE TAQ database (Holden and Jacobsen,
2014). T-statistics are in parentheses below and are computed using time-and-entity-clustered standard
errors. ***, **, * denotes signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, 10% level. We include entity-ﬁxed eﬀects in all
speciﬁcations and value-weight observations.
(1) (2) (3)
Dependent ˆSt ˆSt ˆSt
|ΓHP
t | 6.081** 5.555*
(2.058) (1.876)
|ΩLETF
t | 16.353 14.572
(0.843) (0.750)
rpre
t 0.026 0.029 0.025
(0.235) (0.259) (0.228)
Observations 1,863,111 1,863,111 1,863,111
R2 (%) 0.008 0.006 0.013
Entity FE Yes Yes Yes
Time FE Yes Yes Yes
SEs [t;j] [t;j] [t;j]
41
Appendix E. Performance of Trading Strategies Over
Time
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Cumulative returns
LmHΓ
HmLΩ
HmLΓ,Ω
Marketend
Fig. E1. Performance of Trading Strategies Over Time
The ﬁgure shows the cumulative performance of a one-dollar investment into trading strategies based on
ΓHP and ΩLETF . The Γ HP -strategy, LmHΓ, takes a long (short) position in a stock when the stock’s
ΓHP is in the lowest (highest) decile. The Ω LETF -strategy, HmLΩ, takes a long (short) position in a
stock when the stock’s Ω LETF is in the highest (lowest) decile. The combined strategy, HmL Γ,Ω, takes
a long (short) position in a stock when the stock’s Ω LETF − ΓHP is in the highest (lowest) decile. As a
benchmark, Marketend denotes investing in all stocks from 15:30 to 16:00. The sample period is January
2012 – December 2019.
42
Liquidity Provision to Leveraged ETFs and
Equity Options Rebalancing Flows
Evidence from End-of-Day Stock Prices
Online Appendix
(not for publication)
by Andrea Barbon, Heiner Beckmeyer, Andrea Buraschi, Mathis Moerke
Abstract
This appendix provides supplementary results and additional analyses besides
robustness checks not included in the paper.
Table of Contents:
• Appendix OA1 provides details on the cleaning of high-frequency data.
• Appendix OA2 provides summary statistics for the underlying stocks in the
sample.
• Appendix OA3 provides summary statistics for the leveraged ETFs in the
sample.
• Appendix OA4 calculates the correlation between ΓHP for each option exchange
and the total ΓHP .
• Appendix OA5 investigates the eﬀect of altering the calculation of the average
dollar volume.
• Appendix OA6 investigates the eﬀect of altering the set of delta-hedgers.
• Appendix OA7 splits Γ HP into new and old positions and investigates their
eﬀects.
• Appendix OA8 investigates the eﬀect of scaling returns according to Moskowitz
et al. (2012).
• Appendix OA9 investigates the eﬀect of Γ HP on news and non-news days and
the eﬀect of ΩLETF on days with rpre
j = 0.
• Appendix OA10 investigates the eﬀect across diﬀerent industries.
1
Appendix OA1. Cleaning of High-Frequency Data
To analyze intraday momentum eﬀects in individual stocks, we rely on the NYSE
Trades and Quote (TAQ) database for January 1996 through July 2019. Since the NYSE
provides the raw tape of all trades performed on the included exchanges, multiple cleaning
steps are required. Additionally, we merge the TAQ database with CRSP to use the
PERMNO as a unique identiﬁer per common share of any company.
OA1.1. Cleaning Procedure
We retain only trades with trade correction indicators “00” an “01”, which refer to
correctly recorded trades, and those that have been subsequently altered, but reﬂect the
actual trade price at the time. We further keep only trades with trade sale corrections
”Z”, ”B”, ”U”, ”T”, ”L”, ”G”, ”W”, ”K”, and ”J”, as well as an accompanying ”I”
reﬂecting odd lot trades. To rely on trade prices during regular trading hours only, we
discard all observations before 9:30 and after 16:01. We explicitly include the minute of
4pm, as many closing trades (denoted by sale conditions ”6” or ”M”) fall within the ﬁrst
few seconds afterwards.
If multiple trades occur at exactly the same point in time, we take the median price
as the “correct price”. To make sure that prices are consistent by Ticker, we employ a
bounce-back ﬁlter following Andersen, Bondarenko, and Gonzalez-Perez (2015), which
eﬀectively checks whether any trade’s price deviates by more than 15 times the median
absolute deviation of the day. If this is the case, we will kick this observation if we observe
a reversion to the previous price within the next ﬁve minutes, or 10 trades, whichever
encompasses more trades. We also drop price observations which deviate by more than
two times|log(pt/ˆp)|, where ˆp is the median for the day. We choose trade-based ﬁlters to
check for the internal consistency, instead of relying on the Quote database also provided
by the NYSE, as some observations are falsely recorded in both. Afterwards, we span a
minute-by-minute grid between 9:30 and 16:01 and map trades to these trading minutes,
taking the volume-weighted average price within each minute to limit the impact of
microstructure noise and single trades.
OA1.2. Merge with CRSP
The TAQ database provides intraday trade prices, but lacks information about dis-
tributions, mergers, and delistings. We obtain this information from CRSP, as the low-
2
frequency database in ﬁnancial economics.
We use the PERMNO provided by CRSP as an identiﬁer that is unique over time.
In a ﬁrst step, we merge the historical CUSIP by CRSP (NCUSIP) with the CUSIPs in
the master ﬁle taken from TAQ. In some occasions, we cannot merge available tickers in
the trade ﬁle this way, and in a second step merge the two databases by the root ticker
and ticker suﬃx, which indicates diﬀerent share classes. We keep only stocks with share
codes 10 and 11, denoting common shares, as well as exchange codes 1, 2, 3, 31, 32 and
32, representing the NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ, respectively. Using this procedure,
we can merge most stocks for which we have intraday data available and cover most of
the CRSP sample.
3
Appendix OA2. Summary Statistics of the Underly-
ing
Table OA2.1: Industry Distribution of Underlying Stocks
The table reports time-series averages of industry distributions of the Fama-French 12-industry classiﬁ-
cation. For comparability to the CRSP universe, the distribution of the full CRSP sample is included.
FF-12 Industry Our sample CRSP sample
Consumer durables 0.44% 0.19%
Consumer nondurables 4.57% 2.71%
Manufacturing 10.23% 4.78%
Energy 5.64% 3.4%
Chemicals 3.22% 1.26%
Business Equipment 15.68% 8.62%
Telecom 2.38% 1.95%
Utilities 3.73% 1.9%
Wholesale 11.75% 4.91%
Healthcare 10.64% 5.51%
Finance 10.31% 44.15%
Other 21.41% 20.62%
4
Table OA2.2: Summary Statistics of Underlying Stocks
The table reports summary statistics on the stock-day sample for the underlying stocks. Panel A reports
the time-series summary statistics and Panel B reports the time-series average of cross-sectional distri-
butions. Percent coverage of the stock universe (EW) is the number of stocks in the sample, divided
by the total number of CRSP stocks. Percent coverage of the stock universe (VW) is the total market
capitalization of sample stocks divided by the total CRSP market capitalization. Percent coverage of
stocks traded at NYSE or AMEX is the number of stocks in the sample trading at NYSE or AMEX,
divided by the total number of stocks. The ﬁrm size percentiles are computed using the full CRSP
sample. Number of LETF is the number of LETF a stock is included in. The sample period is January
2012 – December 2019.
Mean Std 10-Pctl Q1 Median Q3 90-Pctl
Panel A: Time-Series Distribution
Number of stocks in the sample each month 992.53 227.92 877.2 973.0 1043.0 1101.25 1140.0
Stock coverage of stock universe (EW) 13.86 3.17 12.43 13.65 14.57 15.26 15.92
Stock coverage of stock universe (VW) 48.79 10.17 48.47 49.76 50.92 51.85 52.72
Stock traded at NYSE or AMEX 38.74 8.07 35.78 37.91 40.19 42.88 43.42
Panel B: Time-Series Average of Cross-Sectional Distributions
Firm size in million 15050 44338 454 1079 3152 11182 31883
Firm size CSRP percentile 77 17 51 66 81 92 96
Number of LETF 9 3 6 7 9 11 14
5
Appendix OA3. Summary Statistics of Leveraged ETFs
Table OA3.1: Summary Statistics of Leveraged ETFs
The table reports time-series summary statistics on the underlying leveraged ETFs in our sample. Num-
ber of LETF is the number of leveraged ETFs. Number of benchmark indices is the number of unique
benchmark indices underlying all leveraged ETFs. Aggregated AUM denotes the assets under man-
agement across all leveraged ETFs, in million. Aggregated leverage-adjusted AUM is the assets under
management adjusted for the rebalancing leverage of each leveraged ETF. Percentage of inverse LETF
(EW) is the number of inverse ETFs divided by the total number of leveraged ETFs. Percentage of
inverse LETF (VW) is the assets under management weighted proportion of inverse ETFs to the total
leveraged ETF sample. Average absolute leverage factor (EW) is the average absolute leverage factor.
Average absolute leverage factor (VW) is the assets under management weighted absolute leverage factor.
The sample period is January 2012 – December 2019.
Mean Std 10% 25% 50% 75% 90%
Number of LETF 71.67 11.05 66.0 72.0 74.0 76.0 79.0
Number of benchmark indices 23.72 3.7 21.0 23.0 25.0 25.0 27.0
Agg. AUM 17.71 4.69 12.03 15.29 16.92 21.33 24.43
Agg. leverage-adjusted AUM 95.33 28.55 64.23 73.01 86.97 121.12 131.71
Perc. of inverse LETF (EW) 45.29 3.38 41.67 43.24 45.07 45.95 51.28
Perc. of inverse LETF (VW) 33.14 15.66 16.31 22.75 28.48 41.77 62.64
Avg. absolute leverage factor (EW) 2.35 0.13 2.21 2.22 2.32 2.45 2.5
Avg. absolute leverage factor (VW) 2.43 0.14 2.29 2.35 2.44 2.53 2.6
6
Appendix OA4. Correlation of Exchange Speciﬁc ΓHP
and Total ΓHP
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
PHLX CBOE NOM ISE GEMX
Fig. OA4.1. Average Three-year Rolling ΓHP Correlations
The ﬁgure shows average three-year rolling correlations between ΓHP based on the delta-hedgers option
inventory of one single exchange (either PHLX, CBOE, NOM, ISE, or GEMX) and Γ HP based on the
pooled delta-hedgers option inventory across all exchanges in our sample.
7
Appendix OA5. Diﬀerent ADV Measures
We investigate whether the choice of the time period over which we calculate the
average dollar volume (ADV) eﬀects our results. We calculate ADV over the previous
week (W) or previous quarter (W) and using the last half hour of a trading day (I) or
the entire daily trading volume (D). As Table OA5.1 shows, the choice of denominator
for ΓHP and ΩLETF has little impact on our results.
Table OA5.1: Eﬀect of Diﬀerent ADV Measures
The table reports the results to regressing returns in the last half hour of a trading day on returns
until 15:30, rpre, gamma hedging pressure Γ HP , and leveraged ETF rebalancing ﬂows Ω LETF following
Equation (9). We exchange the standard ADV measure as the average volume in the last half trading
hour over the last month by similar measures using weekly (W) and quarterly horizons (Q), as well as
measures using daily volume in their constructed (denoted by “-D”). T-statistics are in parentheses below
and are computed using time-and-entity-clustered standard errors. ***, **, * denotes signiﬁcance at the
1%, 5%, 10% level. We include entity ﬁxed eﬀects in all speciﬁcations and value-weight observations.
The sample period is January 2012 – December 2019.
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Dependent rend
t rend
t rend
t rend
t rend
t rend
t
ΓHP
t -10.006*** -55.821*** -10.960*** -59.616*** -10.976*** -60.342***
(-5.518) (-7.094) (-5.521) (-6.949) (-5.244) (-6.763)
ΩLETF
t 41.180*** 177.953*** 46.738*** 190.533*** 48.616*** 201.118***
(4.658) (6.015) (5.198) (6.094) (5.084) (6.099)
rpre
t -0.817*** -0.803*** -0.820*** -0.804*** -0.824*** -0.809***
(-7.430) (-7.176) (-7.452) (-7.148) (-7.501) (-7.227)
Observations 1,882,332 1,882,332 1,882,332 1,882,332 1,882,332 1,882,332
R2 (%) 0.363 0.380 0.370 0.382 0.376 0.391
Entity FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Time FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
SEs [t;j] [t;j] [t;j] [t;j] [t;j] [t;j]
ADV W-I W-D M-I M-D Q-I Q-D
8
Appendix OA6. Diﬀerent Sets of Delta-Hedgers
In the main part of the paper, we assume that delta-hedgers are composed of market
makers and broker/dealers. We exchange the set of delta-hedgers to include only market
makers (Table OA6.1) or to include market makers, broker/dealers, and ﬁrm proprietary
traders (Table OA6.2). The choice of the set of likely delta-hedgers has little impact on
our results.
Table OA6.1: Market Makers as the only Delta-Hedgers
The table reports the results to regressing returns in the last half hour of a trading day on returns until
15:30,rpre and gamma hedging pressure ΓHP , following Equation (9). We assume that market makers are
delta-hedgers. T-statistics are in parentheses below and are computed using time-and-entity-clustered
standard errors. ***, **, * denotes signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, 10% level. We include entity ﬁxed eﬀects
in all speciﬁcations and value-weight observations. The sample period is January 2012 – December 2019.
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Dependent rend
t rend
t rend
t rend
t rend
t rend
t
ΓHP
t -10.354*** -10.292*** -10.345*** -10.312*** -10.355*** -10.355***
(-3.094) (-3.077) (-3.093) (-3.077) (-3.094) (-3.094)
rpre
t -0.739*** -0.741*** -0.739*** -0.739*** -0.739*** -0.739***
(-7.034) (-7.050) (-7.036) (-7.039) (-7.035) (-7.034)
IVt−1 4.517***
(5.029)
ˆRV
pre
t 20.913
(1.159)
ˆRV
end
t 418.390***
(3.143)
PCt−1 -0.014
(-0.092)
O/S$
t−1 244.126
(0.770)
Observations 1,882,332 1,882,332 1,882,236 1,882,236 1,879,827 1,882,327
R2 (%) 0.267 0.286 0.269 0.277 0.267 0.268
Entity FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Time FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
SEs [t;j] [t;j] [t;j] [t;j] [t;j] [t;j]
9
Table OA6.2: Market Makers, Broker/Dealer, and Firm Proprietary Traders as Delta-
Hedgers
The table reports the results to regressing returns in the last half hour of a trading day on returns until
15:30, rpre and gamma hedging pressure Γ HP , following Equation (9). We assume that market makers,
broker/dealer, and ﬁrm proprietary traders are delta-hedgers. T-statistics are in parentheses below and
are computed using time-and-entity-clustered standard errors. ***, **, * denotes signiﬁcance at the 1%,
5%, 10% level. We include entity ﬁxed eﬀects in all speciﬁcations and value-weight observations. The
sample period is January 2012 – December 2019.
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Dependent rend
t rend
t rend
t rend
t rend
t rend
t
ΓHP
t -11.014*** -10.977*** -11.005*** -10.976*** -11.014*** -11.012***
(-6.965) (-6.945) (-6.968) (-6.947) (-6.965) (-6.963)
rpre
t -0.706*** -0.708*** -0.706*** -0.707*** -0.706*** -0.706***
(-6.817) (-6.834) (-6.818) (-6.821) (-6.817) (-6.817)
IVt−1 4.516***
(5.076)
ˆRV
pre
t 18.816
(1.034)
ˆRV
end
t 410.953***
(3.101)
PCt−1 -0.010
(-0.063)
O/S$
t−1 280.615
(0.832)
Observations 1,882,332 1,882,332 1,882,236 1,882,236 1,879,823 1,882,327
R2 (%) 0.296 0.314 0.297 0.306 0.296 0.296
Entity FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Time FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
SEs [t;j] [t;j] [t;j] [t;j] [t;j] [t;j]
10
Appendix OA7. ΓHP based on Older Positions
Endogeneity concerns regarding Equation (9) might be raised given that traders with
public and/or private information on the return of stock j in the last 30 minutes, rend
j ,
choose the option market to exploit this information. To mitigate any concerns, we
follow Ni et al. (2020). Precisely, we split Γ HP in two parts: gamma hedging pressure
originating from older positions held by delta-hedgers at time t−τ, and gamma hedging
pressure stemming from new positions between t−τ and t. Ni et al. (2020) argue that
option positions which existed at t− τ cannot be established due to private and/or
public information after the close at t−τ. In case of short-lived private and/or public
information, positions att−τ are of no use for predicting the return in the last 30 minutes
on t, rpre.
To decompose ΓHP , we ﬁrst deﬁne the gamma imbalance for stock j at time t which
is based on option positions of delta-hedgers at time t−τ as
ΓIB
j,t;τ =


Nt
t−τ∑
o=1
netOIo,t−1−τ× Γo(t− 1,Sclose
j,t−1)×S15:30
j,t ×Multo


× Sclose
j,t−1
100 × 1
ADVend
j,t−1
, (OA1)
whereNt
t−τ denotes the number of options contracts on stock j that are available at time
t−τ and expire after t. The diﬀerence between Equation (OA1) and Equation (4) in
the main paper is that Equation (OA1) uses the net open interest of likely delta-hedgers
at time t−τ and sums over options expiring after t. However, both deﬁnitions use the
gamma of option contracts at the previous trading day, t− 1. Hence, Equation (OA1)
denotes the gamma imbalance at time t of old positions.
Next, we deﬁne the gamma hedging pressure due to old positions as
ΓHP
j,t;τ = 100× ΓIB
j,t;τ×rpre
j,t. (OA2)
We decompose ΓHP at time t into the part that is due to old positions existing at
time t−τ, ΓHP
j,t;τ, and the part due to new positions, Γ HP
j,t;new, as follows
ΓHP
j,t = ΓHP
j,t;τ− ΓHP
j,t;new, (OA3)
where ΓHP
j,t;new = ΓHP
j,t − ΓHP
j,t;τ.
11
Finally, we run the following speciﬁcation where we control for ﬁxed eﬀects and other
control variables,Xj,t,
rend
j,t =β0rpre
j,t +β1ΓHP
j,t;τ +β2ΓHP
j,t;new +γ′Xj,t +FEj +FEt +ϵj,t. (OA4)
We hypothesize that β1 is negative and statistically signiﬁcant. Table OA7.1 and
Table OA7.2 show results with τ set to ﬁve and ten business days, respectively. Both
tables conﬁrm our hypothesis.
12
Table OA7.1: Option Hedging Pressure based on 5-Business Day Old Positions
The table summarizes the results of regressions of returns in the last half hour of a trading day on
gamma hedging pressure based on ﬁve business day old positions Γ HP
t;τ and hedging pressure based on
new positions, ΓHP
t;new, after controlling for returns until 15:30 (rpre), as in speciﬁcation Equation (OA4).
IVt−1 denotes implied volatility at time t− 1. ˆRV
end
t denote the square root of predicted realized
variance for the time period from 15:30 to 16:00. PCt−1 is the put-call-ratio and O/S$
t−1 denotes the
option-to-stock volume in dollar terms. T-statistics are in parentheses below and are computed using
time-and-entity-clustered standard errors. ***, **, * denotes signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, 10% level.
We include entity ﬁxed eﬀects in all speciﬁcations and value-weight observations. The sample period is
January 2012 – December 2019.
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Dependent rend
t rend
t rend
t rend
t rend
t rend
t
ΓHP
t;τ -16.375*** -16.324*** -16.370*** -16.366*** -16.376*** -16.372***
(-6.954) (-6.942) (-6.954) (-6.947) (-6.954) (-6.955)
ΓHP
t;new -1.107*** -1.117*** -1.110*** -1.124*** -1.107*** -1.104***
(-2.601) (-2.638) (-2.611) (-2.664) (-2.600) (-2.590)
rpre
t -0.810*** -0.813*** -0.811*** -0.811*** -0.810*** -0.810***
(-6.765) (-6.776) (-6.767) (-6.767) (-6.766) (-6.765)
IVt−1 5.133***
(4.964)
ˆRV
pre
t 22.224
(1.058)
ˆRV
end
t 435.201***
(2.795)
PCt−1 0.064
(0.299)
O/S$
t−1 283.201
(0.899)
Observations 1,015,379 1,015,379 1,015,333 1,015,333 1,014,433 1,015,375
R2 (%) 0.341 0.363 0.342 0.351 0.341 0.341
Entity FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Time FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
SEs [t;j] [t;j] [t;j] [t;j] [t;j] [t;j]
13
Table OA7.2: Option Hedging Pressure based on 10-Business Day Old Positions
The table summarizes the results of regressions of returns in the last half hour of a trading day on
gamma hedging pressure based on ten business day old positions Γ HP
t;τ and hedging pressure based on
new positions, ΓHP
t;new, after controlling for returns until 15:30 (rpre), as in speciﬁcation Equation (OA4).
IVt−1 denotes implied volatility at time t− 1. ˆRV
end
t denote the square root of predicted realized
variance for the time period from 15:30 to 16:00. PCt−1 is the put-call-ratio and O/S$
t−1 denotes the
option-to-stock volume in dollar terms. T-statistics are in parentheses below and are computed using
time-and-entity-clustered standard errors. ***, **, * denotes signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, 10% level.
We include entity ﬁxed eﬀects in all speciﬁcations and value-weight observations. The sample period is
January 2012 – December 2019.
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Dependent rend
t rend
t rend
t rend
t rend
t rend
t
ΓHP
t;τ -17.973*** -17.912*** -17.972*** -17.959*** -17.973*** -17.973***
(-6.714) (-6.694) (-6.715) (-6.710) (-6.713) (-6.715)
ΓHP
t;new -1.234*** -1.244*** -1.237*** -1.251*** -1.234*** -1.231***
(-2.777) (-2.814) (-2.787) (-2.839) (-2.776) (-2.765)
rpre
t -0.821*** -0.823*** -0.821*** -0.821*** -0.821*** -0.821***
(-6.837) (-6.848) (-6.839) (-6.838) (-6.838) (-6.837)
IVt−1 5.138***
(4.969)
ˆRV
pre
t 22.482
(1.069)
ˆRV
end
t 435.447***
(2.791)
PCt−1 0.064
(0.302)
O/S$
t−1 287.581
(0.910)
Observations 1,015,379 1,015,379 1,015,333 1,015,333 1,014,433 1,015,375
R2 (%) 0.332 0.354 0.334 0.343 0.332 0.333
Entity FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Time FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
SEs [t;j] [t;j] [t;j] [t;j] [t;j] [t;j]
14
Appendix OA8. Scaled Returns as in Moskowitz et al.
(2012)
Instead of using simple returns and value-weighted observations, Moskowitz et al.
(2012) propose the use of scaled returns, which expresses returns in terms of units of
expected risk:
ˆr = r
σr
, (OA5)
whereσr is calculated using an exponentially-weighted moving average from the realized
variance of using 5-minute squared returns from last close to 15:30. The half life is chosen
to equal 60 days.
As shown in Table OA8.1, scaling returns does not alter our results.
Table OA8.1: Using Scaled Returns
The table reports the results to regressing returns in the last half hour of a trading day on returns until
15:30,rpre and gamma hedging pressure ΓHP , following Equation (9). The regression setup follows that
of Table 2 but uses scaled returns. T-statistics in parentheses are derived from standard errors clustered
by date and entity. ***, **, * denotes signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, 10% level. We include entity ﬁxed
eﬀects and weight returns by the stock’s market capitalization. The sample period is January 2012 –
December 2019.
(1) (2) (3)
Dependent rend
t rend
t rend
t
ΩLETF
t 165.089*** 173.968***
(4.936) (5.233)
ΓHP
t -29.157*** -34.042***
(-3.501) (-4.167)
rpre
t -0.060*** -0.068*** -0.063***
(-7.644) (-8.695) (-7.948)
Observations 1,882,236 1,882,236 1,882,236
R2 (%) 0.487 0.536 0.563
Entity FE Yes Yes Yes
Time FE Yes Yes Yes
SEs [t;j] [t;j] [t;j]
15
Appendix OA9. Mechanical Flows
Index versus Stock Speciﬁc Eﬀects
While ΓHP rebalancing activity depends on the return of the underlying stock, the
rebalancing amount for leveraged ETFs depends on the return of the benchmark index of
the leveraged ETF. We exploit this unique structure of the rebalancing ﬂows from lever-
aged ETFs, by conditioning on those stocks for which the return until hedging begins is
near zero (below 10 basis points in absolute terms). Given that the impact of rebalancing
ﬂows is mechanical, we still expect an eﬀect of Ω LETF in roughly the same magnitude as
for the full sample. This approach allows us to investigate the impact of leveraged ETF
rebalancing without being conﬂated by other intraday return phenomena (Heston et al.,
2010; Lou et al., 2019; Bogousslavsky, 2020), or option rebalancing in the form of Γ HP .
The results in Table OA9.1 conﬁrm our prior.
Table OA9.1: Near Zero Returns of the Underlying Stock
The table reports the results to regressing the returns in the last half hour of a trading day on the
Leveraged ETF rebalancing quantity Ω LETF . We have included only stock-day observations for which
the absolute return from the previous day’s close until 15:30 of stockj is below 10 basis points in absolute
terms. T-statistics are in parentheses below and are computed using time-and-entity-clustered standard
errors. ***, **, * denotes signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, 10% level. We include entity ﬁxed eﬀects in all
speciﬁcations and value-weight observations. The sample period is January 2012 – December 2019.
(1)
Dependent rend
t
ΩLETF
t 69.400***
(4.961)
rpre
t -0.899
(-0.434)
Observations 120,913
R2 (%) 0.119
Entity FE Yes
Time FE Yes
SEs [t;j]
16
What is the role of news on fundamentals?
To test that delta-hedging eﬀects are unrelated to fundamental news on the under-
lying stock, we perform sample splits on earnings announcements and material news.
Information on earnings announcement days is obtained from Compustat and I/B/E/S.
Whenever the announcement date for the same stock diﬀers between Compustat and
I/B/E/S, we follow Dellavigna and Pollet (2009) and use the earlier date. Compustat
and I/B/E/S are matched to our CRSP data via the matching algorithms provided by
WRDS. We use the Dow Jones version of Ravenpack News Analytics and its sentiment
scores to identify days with signiﬁcant news for each underlying. We restrict our news
sample to articles that are most relevant for a particular stock, i.e. a relevance score of
100. Furthermore, we only include news that is highly positive (sentiment score above
0.75) or highly negative (sentiment score below 0.25).
We identify the two weeks centered around earnings announcements and the releases
of material news as indicated by RavenPack for each stock in our sample. The estimated
coeﬃcients for stocks with and without material news releases or earnings announcements
in Table OA9.2 barely diﬀer, conﬁrming the mechanical nature of Γ HP -ﬂows.
17
Table OA9.2: Impact of Fundamental Information
The table reports the results to regressing the returns in the last half hour of a trading day on returns until
15:30,rpre, and gamma hedging pressure ΓHP . The regression results are reported for several subsamples
where we focus on or exclude days with fundamental information, either earnings announcements (EA)
or fundamental news releases identiﬁed by RavenPack. Speciﬁcation (1) uses the subsample for which
Compustat and/or I/B/E/S do not report earnings announcements (EA). Speciﬁcation (2) excludes day-
asset observations for which Compustat and/or I/B/E/S report earnings announcements. In speciﬁcation
(3) we exclude asset-day observations for which RavenPack documents either at least one negative (score
≥ 25) or one positive (score ≤ 75) news appearance, whereas speciﬁcation (4) includes only these
observations. Whenever earnings announcements or fundamental news are released on day t for asset
j, we exclude also a window of 5 trading days around t for asset j. t-statistics are in parentheses
below. T-statistics are in parentheses below and are computed using time-and-entity-clustered standard
errors. ***, **, * denotes signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, 10% level. We include entity ﬁxed eﬀects in all
speciﬁcations and value-weight observations. The sample period is January 2012 – December 2019.
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Dependent rend
t rend
t rend
t rend
t
ΓHP
t -9.865*** -8.117* -10.551*** -8.671***
(-5.557) (-1.879) (-6.635) (-2.780)
rpre
t -0.749*** -0.744*** -0.662*** -0.850***
(-6.907) (-4.296) (-6.824) (-5.168)
Observations 1,607,439 274,893 1,567,086 315,246
R2 (%) 0.263 0.335 0.219 0.390
Entity FE Yes Yes Yes Yes
Time FE Yes Yes Yes Yes
SEs [t;j] [t;j] [t;j] [t;j]
Subsample Excluding EA Only EA Excluding News Only News
18
Appendix OA10. Eﬀects Across Industries
Investor attention for stocks in respective sectors changes over time. To compare how
hedging pressure from the options market impacts end-of-day returns, we sort stocks into
their respective industry following the classiﬁcation on Kenneth French’s website.
Table OA10.1 displays results. ΓIB− and ΩLETF−eﬀects are present and statistically
signiﬁcant in all industries.
Table OA10.1: Eﬀects in Diﬀerent Industries
The table reports the results to regressing returns in the last half hour of a trading day on re-
turns until 15:30, rpre and gamma hedging pressure Γ HP , following Equation (9). The sample is
split by the industry classiﬁcation based on SIC codes, following Kenneth French’s website, https:
//mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html. T-statistics in paren-
theses are derived from standard errors clustered by date and entity. ***, **, * denotes signiﬁcance
at the 1%, 5%, 10% level. We include entity ﬁxed eﬀects and weight returns by the stock’s market
capitalization. The sample period is January 2012 – December 2019.
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Dependent rend
t rend
t rend
t rend
t rend
t
ΓHP
t -8.777*** -6.822*** -6.919* -20.417*** -16.849***
(-5.212) (-3.145) (-1.814) (-4.111) (-5.734)
ΩLETF
t 31.260*** 21.224*** 47.491*** 95.533*** 38.054***
(6.586) (3.642) (8.304) (6.488) (4.318)
rpre
t -0.680*** -0.839*** -0.978*** -0.959*** -0.654***
(-5.585) (-4.495) (-4.630) (-4.689) (-3.491)
Observations 346,342 427,144 366,477 201,183 541,186
R2 (%) 0.269 0.295 0.430 0.748 0.308
Entity FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Time FE Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
SEs [t;j] [t;j] [t;j] [t;j] [t;j]
Industry Consumer Manuf.+Energy Business Health Other
19
References
Andersen, T. G., Bondarenko, O., Gonzalez-Perez, M. T., 2015. Exploring return dynam-
ics via corridor implied volatility. Review of Financial Studies 28, 2902–2945.
Bogousslavsky, V., 2020. The Cross-Section of Intraday and Overnight Returns. Working
paper.
Dellavigna, S., Pollet, J. M., 2009. Investor Inattention and Friday Earnings Announce-
ments. Journal of Finance 64, 709–749.
Heston, S. L., Korajczyk, R. A., Sadka, R., 2010. Intraday patterns in the cross-section
of stock returns. Journal of Finance 65, 1369–1407.
Lou, D., Polk, C., Skouras, S., 2019. A tug of war: Overnight versus intraday expected
returns. Journal of Financial Economics 134, 192–213.
Moskowitz, T. J., Ooi, Y. H., Pedersen, L. H., 2012. Time series momentum. Journal of
Financial Economics 104, 228 – 250, special Issue on Investor Sentiment.
20